The Project Gutenberg eBook of Famous Frosts and Frost Fairs in Great Britain
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Famous Frosts and Frost Fairs in Great Britain

Author: William Andrews


        
Release date: August 17, 2017 [eBook #55375]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/55375

Credits: Produced by deaurider and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAMOUS FROSTS AND FROST FAIRS IN GREAT BRITAIN ***

FAMOUS FROSTS AND FROST FAIRS.

_Number 389_

_Of Four-Hundred Copies printed._




[Illustration: FROST FAIR ON THE RIVER THAMES, IN 1814.]




                              FAMOUS FROSTS
                                   AND
                               FROST FAIRS
                                   IN
                             GREAT BRITAIN.

                     Chronicled from the Earliest to
                            the Present Time.

                                   BY
                      _WILLIAM ANDREWS, F.R.H.S._,
      Author of “Historic Romance,” “Modern Yorkshire Poets,” etc.

                                 LONDON:
               GEORGE REDWAY, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
                                  1887.




PREFACE.


The aim of this book is to furnish a reliable account of remarkable
frosts occurring in this country from the earliest period in our Annals
to the present time. In many instances, I have given particulars as
presented by contemporary writers of the scenes and circumstances
described.

In the compilation of this Chronology, several hundred books, magazines,
and newspapers, have been consulted, and a complete list would fill
several pages. I must not, however, omit to state that I have derived
much valuable information from a scarce book printed on the Ice of
the River Thames, in the year 1814, and published under the title of
“Frostiana.” I have gleaned information from the late Mr. Cornelius
Walford’s “Famines of the World,” which includes a carefully prepared
summary of “The Great Frosts of History.” Some of the poems in my pages,
bibliographical notes and facts, are culled from Dr. Rimbault’s “Old
Ballads Illustrating the Great Frost of 1683-4,” issued by the Percy
Society. It will be also observed that I have drawn curious information
from Parish Registers and old Parish Accounts.

Several ladies and gentlemen have rendered me great assistance, and
amongst the number must be named, with gratitude, Mrs. George Linnæus
Banks, author of “The Manchester Man;” Mr. Jesse Quail, F.S.S., editor
of the _Northern Daily Telegraph_; Mr. C. H. Stephenson, actor, author,
and antiquary; Mr W. H. K. Wright, F.R.H.S., editor of the _Western
Antiquary_; Mr. W. G. B. Page, of the Hull Subscription Library;
Mr. Frederick Ross, F.R.H.S., and Mr. Ernest E. Baker, editor of the
“Somersetshire Reprints.” Mr. E. H. Coleman kindly prepared for me a long
list of books and magazines containing articles on this subject. I have
to thank Mr. Mason Jackson, the author of “The Pictorial Press,” for
kindly presenting to me the quaint cut which appears on page 29 of my
work.

In 1881, the greater part of the matter contained in this book appeared
in the _Bradford Times_, a well-conducted journal, under the able
editorship of Mr. W. H. Hatton, F.R.H.S. The articles attracted more than
local attention, and I was pressed to reproduce them in a volume, but
owing to various circumstances, I have not been able to comply with the
request until now. The record is now brought up to date, and many facts
and particulars, gleaned since the articles appeared, have been added.

                                                         WILLIAM ANDREWS.

    Rose Cottage, Hessle, Hull,
    January, 1887.




[Illustration]

Famous Frosts and Frost Fairs in Great Britain.


[Sidenote: A.D.]

[Sidenote: 134]

Thames frozen over for two months.

[Sidenote: 153]

Very severe frost, lasting nearly three months. English rivers frozen,
including the Thames.

[Sidenote: 173]

A frost lasted three months, and was followed by a dearth.

[Sidenote: 220]

A continuous frost of five months in Britain.

[Sidenote: 250]

Thames frozen for nine weeks.

[Sidenote: 290-91]

Severe frost lasted six weeks. English rivers frozen.

[Sidenote: 359]

The frost very severe in England and Scotland. It lasted fourteen weeks
in the latter country.

[Sidenote: 474]

Four months’ frost, and great snow.

[Sidenote: 507-8]

Frost lasted two months: rivers frozen.

[Sidenote: 525]

Thames frozen for six weeks.

[Sidenote: 604]

A frost lasting four months, followed by dearth in Scotland: also very
severe in England.

[Sidenote: 670]

“A fatal frost.”--SHORT.

[Sidenote: 695]

Thames frozen for six weeks, and booths erected on the ice.

[Sidenote: 759-60]

Frost from October 1st, 759, to February 26th, 760.

[Sidenote: 821]

Great frost after two or three weeks’ rain.

[Sidenote: 827]

Thames frozen for nine weeks.

[Sidenote: 908]

The greater part of the English rivers frozen for two months.

[Sidenote: 923]

Thames frozen for thirteen weeks.

[Sidenote: 962]

The frost this year was so great as to cause a famine.

[Sidenote: 975]

Severe frost.

[Sidenote: 987]

This year is notable for a frost lasting one hundred and twenty days.

[Sidenote: 998]

Thames frozen for five weeks.

[Sidenote: 1020]

Very severe frost.

[Sidenote: 1035]

Short says: “Frost on Midsummer day; all grass and grain and fruit
destroyed; a dearth.”

[Sidenote: 1059]

Great frost, followed by a severe plague and famine.

[Sidenote: 1061]

Thames frozen for seven weeks.

[Sidenote: 1063]

Fourteen weeks’ frost: Thames frozen.

[Sidenote: 1076-7]

Frost lasted from 1st November, 1076, to 15th April, 1077. It is recorded
in the “Harleian Miscellany,” iii, page 167, that: “In the tenth year
of his [William the Conqueror] reign, the cold of winter was exceeding
memorable, both for sharpness and for continuance; for the earth remained
hard from the beginning of November until the midst of April then
ensuing.”

[Sidenote: 1086]

According to Walford’s “Insurance Cyclopædia,” “The weather was so
inclement that in the unusual efforts made to warm the houses, nearly all
the chief cities of the kingdom were destroyed by fire, including a great
part of London and St. Paul’s.”

[Sidenote: 1092]

In this year occurred a famous frost, and it is stated, in the quaint
language of an old chronicler, that “the great streams [of England] were
congealed in such a manner that they could draw two hundred horsemen and
carriages over them; whilst at their thawing, many bridges, both of wood
and stone, were borne down, and divers water-mills were broken up and
carried away.”

[Sidenote: 1095-99]

Very severe winters.

[Sidenote: 1114-15]

The following is from an “Old Chronicle:” “Great frost; timber bridges
broken down by weight of ice. This year was the winter so severe with
snow and frost, that no man who was then living ever remembered one more
severe; in consequence of which there was great destruction of cattle.”

[Sidenote: 1121-22]

A severe frost killed the grain crops. A famine followed.

[Sidenote: 1128]

Very severe frost.

[Sidenote: 1149-50]

Frost lasted from 10th December to 19th February.

[Sidenote: 1154]

A great frost.

[Sidenote: 1176]

A frost lasted from Christmas to Candlemas.

[Sidenote: 1205]

In Stow’s “Chronicle,” it is recorded that on the 14th day of January,
1205, “began a frost which continued till the 20th day of March, so that
no ground could be tilled; whereof it came to passe that, in the summer
following, a quarter of wheat was sold for a mark of silver in many
places of England, which for the most part, in the days of King Henry
II., was sold for twelve pence; a quarter of oats for forty pence, that
were wont to be sold for fourpence. Also the money was so sore clipped
that there was no remedy but to have it renewed.” Short states, “Frozen
ale and wine sold by weight.”

[Sidenote: 1207]

Fifteen weeks’ frost.

[Sidenote: 1209]

A long and hard winter followed by dearth.

[Sidenote: 1221]

Severe frost.

[Sidenote: 1226]

Severe frost and snow.

[Sidenote: 1233]

Frost lasted until Candlemas.

[Sidenote: 1234-35]

Penkethman gives the following particulars of this frost: “18 Henry
III. was a great frost at Christmasse, which destroyed the corne in
the ground, and the roots and hearbs in the gardens, continuing till
Candlemasse without any snow, so that no man could plough the ground,
and all the yeare after was unseasonable weather, so that barrenesse of
all things ensued, and many poor folks died for the want of victualls,
the rich being so bewitched with avarice that they could yield them no
reliefe.”

[Sidenote: 1241]

A great frost after a heavy fall of snow.

[Sidenote: 1250]

Very severe frost.

[Sidenote: 1254]

A severe frost from 1st January to 14th March.

[Sidenote: 1263]

On St. Nicholas’s Day a month’s hard frost set in.

[Sidenote: 1269]

A frost lasted from 30th November to the 2nd February.

[Sidenote: 1281-2]

“From Christmas to the Purification of Our Lady, there was such a frost
and snow as no man living could remember the like: where, through five
arches of London Bridge, and all Rochester Bridge, were borne downe and
carried away by the streame; and the like hapned to many other bridges
in England. And, not long after, men passed over the Thames between
Westminster and Lambeth dryshod.”--Stow, edited by Howes, 1631.

[Sidenote: 1288]

Great frost and snow.

[Sidenote: 1337]

Severe frost without snow.

[Sidenote: 1338]

Twelve weeks’ frost, after rain.

[Sidenote: 1353]

A frost from 6th December to 12th March.

[Sidenote: 1363-64]

“Very terrible” frost from 16th September to 6th April.

[Sidenote: 1407]

A frost lasted fourteen weeks.

[Sidenote: 1410]

It is recorded in the “Chronicles of the Grey Friars of London,” as
follows: “Thys yere was the grete frost and ise, and most sharpest winter
that ever man sawe, and it duryd fourteen wekes, so that men myght in
dyvers places both goo and ryde over the Temse.”

[Sidenote: 1434-35]

Stow records that the Thames was frozen, from below London Bridge to
Gravesend, from December 25th to February 10th, when the merchandise
which came to the Thames mouth was carried to London by land.

[Sidenote: 1438]

A long frost.

[Sidenote: 1506]

We find this entry in the “Chronicles of Grey Friars of London”: “Such a
sore snowe and a frost that men myght goo with carttes over the Temse and
horses, and it lastyed tylle Candlemas.”

[Sidenote: 1515]

The Thames frozen, and carts crossed on the ice to and from Lambeth to
Westminster.

[Sidenote: 1523]

Very severe frost.

[Sidenote: 1564-65]

Interesting particulars of this severe frost are given in Stow’s
“Annals,” and Holinshed’s “Chronicle.” The latter historian says that the
frost continued to such an extremity that, on New Year’s Eve, “People
went over and alongst the Thames on the ise, from London Bridge to
Westminster. Some plaied at the football as boldlie there, as if it had
been on the drie land; divers of the court being then at Westminster,
shot dailie at prickes set upon the Thames; and the people, both men
and women, went on the Thames in greater numbers than in anie street of
the Citie of London. On the third daie of January, at night, it began
to thaw, and on the fifth there was no ise to be seene betweene London
Bridge and Lambeth, which sudden thaw caused great floods, and high
waters, that bare downe bridges and houses, and drowned manie people in
England, especiallie in Yorkshire. Owes Bridge was borne awaie, with
others.” There is a tradition that Queen Elizabeth walked upon the ice.

[Sidenote: 1607]

An old tradition still lingers in Derbyshire, respecting the famous Bess
of Hardwick, to the effect that a fortune teller told her that her death
would not happen as long as she continued building. She caused to be
erected several noble structures, including Hardwick and Chatsworth, two
of the most stately homes of old England. Her death occurred in the year
1607, during a very severe frost, when the workmen could not continue
their labours, although they tried to mix their mortar with hot ale.

Malt liquor in the days of yore was believed to add to the durability of
mortar, and items bearing on this subject occur in parish accounts. The
following entries are extracted from the parish books of Ecclesfield,
South Yorkshire:--

[Sidenote: 1619]

    Itm. 7 metts [_i.e._ bushels] of lyme
    for poynting some places in the
    church wall, and on the leades           ij_s._ iiij_d._

    Itm. For 11 gallands of strong
    liquor for the blending of the lyme     iij_s._ viij_d._

Two years later we find mention of “strong liquor” for pointing and ale
for drinking:--

[Sidenote: 1621]

    For a secke of malt for pointing
    steeple                                   viij_s._

    To Boy wyfe for Brewing itt                        vj_d._

    For xvij gallons of strong Lycker          vij_s._  4_d._

    For sixe gallons of ale wch. we besttowed
    of the workmen whilst they
    was pointing steeple                        ij_s._

    For egges for poynting church               ij_s._

Many of the old parish accounts contain items similar to the foregoing.

[Sidenote: 1607]

The following is an abstract from Drake’s “Eboracum; or, the History and
Antiquities of York;” “About Martinmass (1607) began an extream frost;
the river Ouze was wholly frozen up, so hard that you might have passed
with cart and carriage as well as upon firm ground. Many sports were
practised upon the ice, as shooting at eleven score, says my ancient
authority, bowling, playing at football, cudgels, &c. And a horse-race
was run from the tower at S. Mary[’s] Gate End along and under the great
arch of the bridge to the Crain at Skeldergate postern.”

[Sidenote: 1608]

This year a frost fair was held upon the Thames. Edmund Howes, in his
“Continuation of the Abridgement of Stow’s English Chronicle,” 1611, p.
481, gives the following curious account of it: “The 8th of December
began a hard frost, and continued untill the 15th of the same, and then
thawed; the 22nd of December it began againe to freeze violently, so as
divers persons went halfe way over the Thames upon the ice: and the 30th
of December, at every ebbe, for the flood removed the ice, and forced
the people daily to tread new paths, except only betweene Lambeth and
the ferry at Westminster, the which, by incessant treading, became very
firm, and free passage, untill the great thaw: and from Sunday, the tenth
of January, untill the fifteenth of the same, the frost grew so extreme,
as the ice became firme, and removed not, and then all sorts of men,
women, and children, went boldly upon the ice in most parts; some shot
at prickes, others bowled and danced, with other variable pastimes; by
reason of which concourse of people were many that set up boothes and
standings upon the ice, as fruit-sellers, victuallers, that sold beere
and wine, shoemakers, and a barber’s tent, etc.” It is also stated that
the tents &c. had fires in them. The artichokes in the gardens about
London were killed by the frost. The ice lasted until the afternoon of
the 2nd of February. Gough presented to the Bodleian Library, a rare
tract containing a wood-cut representation of the Thames in its frozen
state, with a view of London Bridge in the distance. It is entitled:
“Cold Doings in London, except it be at the Lottery, with Newes out
of the Country. A familliar talk between a Countryman and a Citizen,
touching this terrible Frost, and the Great Lottery, and the effect of
them.” London, 1608, quarto.

[Sidenote: 1609]

Great frost commenced in October, and lasted four months. The Thames
frozen, and heavy carriages driven over it.

[Sidenote: 1614]

It is recorded in Drake’s “Eboracum” as follows: “On the 16th of January
the same year [1614] it began to snow and freeze, and so by intervals
snowing without any thaw till the 7th of March following; at which time
was such a heavy snow upon the earth as was not remembered by any man
then living. It pleased God that at the thaw fell very little rain,
nevertheless the flood was so great, that the Ouze ran down North Street
and Skeldergate with such violence as to force all the inhabitants of
those streets to leave their houses. This inundation chanced to happen
in the Assize week, John Armitage, Esquire, being then High Sheriff
of Yorkshire. Business was hereby much obstructed; at Ouze bridge end
were four boats continually employed in carrying people [a]cross the
river; the like in Walmgate [a]cross the Foss. Ten days this inundation
continued at the height, and many bridges were driven down by it in the
country, and much land overflown. After this storm, says my manuscript,
followed such fair and dry weather, that in April the ground was as dusty
as in any time of summer. This drought continued till the 20th of August
following without any rain at all; and made such a scarcity of hay,
beans, and barley, that the former was sold at York for 30s. and 40s. a
wayne load, and at Leeds for four pounds.”

[Sidenote: 1615]

A severe frost from the 17th January to 7th March. In 1814 a tract was
republished entitled “The Cold Yeare: a Deep Snow in which Men and
Cattle perished; written in Dialogue between a London Shopkeeper and a
North-countryman.” 1615. 4to.

[Sidenote: 1620]

“This year a frost enabled the Londoners to carry on all manner of sports
and trades upon the river.” “Old and New London,” by E. Walford, M.A., v
3, p. 312.

[Sidenote: 1634]

Says a contributor to “Notes and Queries” in the _Nottingham Guardian_,
the following is an extract from Prynne’s “Divine Tragedie lately
acted,” 1636:--“On January the 25th, 1634, being the Lord’s Day, in the
time of the last great frost, fourteen young men, presuming to play at
football on the river Trent, near Gainsborough, coming altogether in a
scuffle, the ice suddenly broke, and there were eight of them drowned.”
The “Divine Tragedie,” like several other works of that period, was
written to show how judgments were overtaking the people because of the
recent order that the Book of Liberty should be read in churches, which
legalised sports on Sunday after service.

[Sidenote: 1648-49]

John Evelyn wrote in his “Diary;” “Now was the Thames frozen over, and
horrid tempests of wind.”

[Sidenote: 1663]

From the 28th January to 11th February, severe frost. Samuel Pepys
records in his “Diary,” “8th February being very hard frost; 28th August,
cold all night and this morning, and a very great frost they say, abroad;
which is much, having had no summer at all, almost.”

[Sidenote: 1664-65]

Severe frost from 28th December to 7th February. Pepys says, 6 February:
“One of the coldest days, they say, ever felt in England.”

[Illustration: FROST FAIR ON THE THAMES IN THE REIGN OF CHARLES II.]

[Sidenote: 1672]

In the December of 1672 occurred in the West of England, an uncommon
kind of shower of freezing rain, or raining ice. It is recorded that
this rain, as soon as it touched anything above ground, as a bough or
the like, immediately settled into ice; and by multiplying and enlarging
the icicles broke down with its weight. The rain that fell on the snow
immediately froze into ice, without sinking in the snow at all. It made
an incredible destruction of trees, beyond anything in all history.
“Had it concluded with some gust of wind” says a gentleman on the spot,
“it might have been of terrible consequence. I weighed the sprig of an
ash tree, of just three quarters of a pound, the ice of which weighed
sixteen pounds. Some were frighted with the noise of the air till they
discerned it was the clatter of icy boughs dashed against each other.”
Dr. Beale says, that there was no considerable frost observed on the
ground during the whole time; whence he concludes that a frost may be
very intense and dangerous on the tops of some hills and plains; while
in other places, it keeps at two, three or four feet distance above the
ground, rivers, lakes, &c. The frost was followed by a forwardness of
flowers and fruits.

The foregoing appears to have escaped the notice of the compiler of an
interesting and informing little book entitled “Odd Showers.” London,
1870.

[Sidenote: 1683-84]

From the beginning of December until the 5th of February, to use the
words of Maitland, frost “congealed the river Thames to that degree,
that another city, as it were, was erected thereon; where, by the great
number of streets and shops, with their rich furniture, it represented a
great fair, with a variety of carriages, and diversions of all sorts; and
near Whitehall a whole ox was roasted on the ice.” Evelyn gives perhaps
the best account of this’ great frost. Writing in his “Diary” under
date of January 24th, 1684, he observes, “the frost continuing more and
more severe, the Thames before London, was still planted with boothes
in formal streetes, all sorts of trades and shops furnish’d and full
of commodities, even to a printing presse, where the people and ladyes
tooke a fancy to have their names printed, and the day and yeare set down
when printed on the Thames: this humour tooke so universally, that ’twas
estimated the printer gain’d £5 a day, for printing a line onely, at
sixpence a name, besides what he got by ballads, etc. Coaches plied from
Westminster to the Temple, and from several other staires, to and fro,
as in the streetes, sleds, sliding with skeetes, a bull-baiting, horse
and coach races, puppet-plays, and interludes, cookes, tipling, and other
lewd places, so that it seem’d to be a bacchanalian triumph, or carnival
on the water.” Evelyn tells how the traffic and festivity were continued
until February the 5th, when he states that “it began to thaw, but froze
again. My coach crossed from Lambeth to the horse-ferry, at Milbank,
Westminster. The boothes were almost all taken downe, but there was just
a map, or landskip, cut in copper, representing all the manner of the
camp, and the several actions, sports, pastimes, thereon, in memory of so
signal a frost.”

King Charles visited the sports on the Thames, in company with members of
his family and of the royal household. They had their names printed on a
quarto sheet of Dutch paper, measuring three and a half inches by four.
The following is a copy of the interesting document:--

    CHARLES,      KING.
    JAMES,        DUKE.
    KATHERINE,    QUEEN.
    MARY,         DUTCHESS.
    ANN,          PRINCESSE.
    GEORGE,       PRINCE.
    HANS IN KELDER.

    _London_: Printed by G. Croom, on the ICE, on the River _Thames_,
    _January 31, 1684_.

In the foregoing list of names we have Charles the Second; his brother
James, Duke of York, afterwards James the Second; Queen Catherine,
Infanta of Portugal; Mary D’Este, sister of Francis, Duke of Modena,
James’s second duchess; the Princess Anne, second daughter of the Duke
of York, afterwards Queen Anne; and her husband Prince George of Denmark.
It has been suggested that the last name displays a touch of the King’s
humour, and signifies “Jack in the Cellar,” alluding to the pregnant
situation of Anne of Denmark.

In some quaint lines, entitled “Thamasis’s Advice to the Painter, from
her frigid zone, etc.” “printed by G. Croom, on the river of Thames,”
occurs:

                “To the print-house go,
    Where Men the art of Printing soon do know,
    Where for a Teaster, you may have your name
    Printed, hereafter for to show the same:
    And sure, in former Ages, ne’er was found
    A Press to print, where men so oft were droun’d!”

Landskip, mentioned by Evelyn, is entitled “An exact and lively Mapp or
Representation of Boothes, and all the Varieties of Showes and Humours
upon the Ice, on the River of Thames by London, during that memorable
Frost, 35th yeare of the Reign of his Sacred Majesty King Charles the
Second. Anno Dni MDCLXXXIII. With an Alphabetical Explanation of the most
remarkable figures.” It consists of a whole-sheet copper-plate engraving,
the view extending from the Temple-stairs and Bankside to London-bridge.
In an oval cartouche at the top within the frame of the print, is the
title; and below the frame are the alphabetical references, with the
words “Printed and sold by William Warter, Stationer, at the signe of
the Talbott, under the Mitre Tavern in Fleete street, London.” In the
foreground of this representation of Frost Fair appear extensive circles
of spectators surrounding a bull-baiting, and the rapid revolution of a
whirling-chair or car, drawn by several men, by a long rope fastened to
a stake fixed in the ice. Large boats, covered with tilts, capable of
containing a considerable number of passengers, and decorated with flags
and streamers, are represented as being used for sledges, some being
drawn by horses, and others by watermen, lacking their usual employment.
Another sort of boat was mounted on wheels; and one vessel, called “the
drum boat,” was distinguished by a drummer placed at the prow. The
pastimes of throwing at a cock, sliding and skating, roasting an ox,
football, skittles, pigeon-holes, cups and balls, &c., are represented as
being carried on in various parts of the river; whilst a sliding-hutch,
propelled by a stick; a chariot, moved by a screw; and stately coaches
filled with visitors, appear to be rapidly moving in various directions,
and sledges with coals and wood are passing between London and Southwark
shores. An impression of this plate will be found in the Royal Collection
of Topographical Prints and Drawings, given by George the Fourth to the
British Museum, vol. xxvii., art. 39. There is also a variation of the
same engraving in the City Library at Guildhall, divided with common ink
into compartments, as if intended to be used as cards, and numbered in
the margin, in type with Roman numerals, in sets of ten each, with two
extra.

This famous frost gave rise to many pictures and poems. In the British
Museum is a broadside as follows:

    “A TRUE DESCRIPTION OF BLANKET FAIR UPON THE RIVER THAMES, IN THE
    TIME OF THE GREAT FROST IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD, 1683.”

    How am I fill’d with wonder for to see
    A flooding river now a road to be,
    Where ships and barges used to frequent,
    Now may you see a booth of fudling tent;
    And those that us’d to ask where shall I land ye,
    Now cry, what lack ye, sir, beer, ale, or brandy?
    Here, here, walk in, and you shall surely find
    Your entertainment good, my usage kind.
    Booths they increased dayly, more and more,
    People by thousands flocking from the shore;
    And in such heaps they thither did repair,
    As if they had been hasting to a fair.
    And such a fair I never yet came near,
    Where shop-rents were so cheap, and goods so dear.
    Then might you have all kind of earthenware,
    You can scarce name a thing but what was there.
    There was to sell both French and Spanish wine,
    And yet, perhaps, a dishclout for a signe;
    In short, the like was never seen before,
    Where coaches run as if upon the shore;
    And men on horseback to and fro did ride,
    Not minding either current, or the tide:
    It was exceeding strange at first to see,
    Both men and women so advent’rous be;
    And yet at last it grew so very common,
    ’Twas not admir’d, it seemed strange to no man.
    Then from the Temple there was built a street,
    Made old and young, and all admire that see’t;
    Which street to Southwark reached. There might you see
    Wonders! if you did love variety,
    There was roast beef, and gamon to be sold,
    But at so dear a rate, I dare be bold
    To say, ’twas never sold so on the shore,
    Nor on the Thames, in haste, be any more.
    There were Dutch whimsies turning swiftly round,
    By which the owners cleared many a pound;
    And coles and corn was there in sledges draw’d,
    As if the Thames would never have been thaw’d.
    All kinds of trades did to this market come,
    Hoping to get more profit than at home:
    And some whose purses were a little swel’d,
    Would not have car’d how long the frost had held.
    In several places there was nine-pins plaid,
    And pidgeon holes for to beget a trade.
    Dancing and fidling too there was great store,
    As if they had not been from off the shore;
    The art of printing there was to be seen,
    Which in no former age had ever been;
    And goldsmiths’ shops were furnished with plate,
    But they must dearly pay for’t that would hav’t.
    And coffee-houses in great numbers were,
    Scattered about in this cold freezing fair,
    There might you sit down by a char-cole fire,
    And for your money have your heart’s desire,
    A dish of coffee, chocalet or tea,
    Could man desire more furnished to be?
    No, no, if you the world should wander through,
    No fair like this could pleasant seem to you.
    There was the baiting of the ugly bear,
    Which sport to see hundreds did repair,
    And I believe since the world’s first creation,
    The like was never seen in this our nation:
    And football playing there was day by day,
    Some broke their legs, and some their arms they say:
    All striving to get credit, but some paid
    Most dearly for it, I am half afraid.
    Bull-baiting likewise there was known to be,
    Which on the Thames before none ever see,
    And never was poor dogs more bravely tost
    Then they were, in this prodigious frost;
    Th’ inraged bull perceiv’d his enemies,
    And how to guard himself could not devise,
    But with his horns did toss them too and fro,
    As if their angry meaning he did know;
    Besides all this a thing more strange and rare
    Than all the things were seen in Freezland fair,
    An ox was roasted whole, which thousands saw,
    For ’twas not many dayes before the thaw;
    The like by no man in this present age
    Was ever seen upon this icy stage.
    And this hard frost it did so long endure,
    It pinch’d, and almost famish’d many poor.
    But one thing more I needs to you must tell
    The truth of which thousands do know full well,
    There was fox-hunting on this frozen river
    Which may a memorandum be for ever.
    For I do think since Adam drew his breath
    No Fox was hunted on the ice to death.
    Thus have you heard what wonders there were seen,
    How heaven and earth the people walk’d between.
    And since the world at first had its creation,
    The like was never seen in this our nation.
    Yet was it hard and grievous to the poor,
    Who many hungry bellies did endure.
    Sad spectacles enough you might behold
    Who felt th’ effect of this prodigious cold;
    But God who is most righteous, good, and just,
    Will them preserve who in him put their trust;
    And when their dangers greatest seem to be,
    Blest be his name, he then doth sit them free.
    Then let us all, while we have time and breath,
    Be still prepar’d to meet with pale-fac’d death.
    That when he comes we need not be afraid,
    Nor at his dart be frighted or dismaid;
    If we on Jesus Christ wholly depend,
    He’l prove to us an everlasting friend.

    London: Printed by H. Brugis, in Green Arbor, Little Old Bayly.
    1684.

The following is a copy of a broadside preserved in the British Museum:--

    GREAT BRITAIN’S WONDER: OR, LONDON’S ADMIRATION.

    Being a true Representation of a prodigious Frost, which began
    about the beginning of December, 1683, and continued till the
    fourth day of February following, and held on with such violence,
    that men and beasts, coaches and carts, went as frequently
    thereon, as boats were wont to pass before. There was also a
    street of booths built from the Temple to Southwark, where were
    sold all sorts of goods imaginable, namely, cloaths, plate,
    earthenware, meat, drink, brandy, tobacco, and a hundred sorts of
    other commodities not here inserted: it being the wonder of this
    present age, and a great consternation to all the spectators.

    BEHOLD the wonder of this present age,
    A famous river now become a stage.
    Question not what I now declare to you,
    The _Thames_ is now both _fair_ and _market_ too;
    And many thousands dayly do resort,
    There to behold the pastime and the sport,
    Early and late, used by young and old,
    Who valu’d not the fierceness of the cold;
    And did not think of that Almighty hand
    Who made the waters bare, like to the land.
    Thousands and thousands to the river flocks,
    Where mighty flakes of ice do lye like rocks.
    There may you see the _coaches_ swiftly run,
    As if beneath the ice were waters none;
    And sholes of people every where there be,
    Just like to herrings in the brackish sea;
    And there the quaking water-men will stand ye,
    Kind master, drink you beer, or ale, or brandy?
    Walk in, kind sir, this booth it is the chief,
    We’l entertain you with a slice of beef,
    And what you please to eat or drink, ’tis here,
    No booth, like mine, affords such dainty cheer.
    Another crys, Here master, they but scoff ye,
    Here is a dish of famous new made coffee.
    And some do say a giddy senseless ass
    May on the Thames be furnished with a lass;
    But, to be short, such wonders there are seen,
    That in this age before hath never been.
    Before the Temple there a street is made,
    And there is one almost of every trade:
    There may you also this hard frosty winter,
    See on the rocky ice a working printer,
    Who hopes by his own heart to reap some gain,
    Which he perchance does think he may obtain.
    Here is also a lottery, and musick too,
    Yea, a cheating, drunken, leud, and debauch’d crew.
    Hot codlins, pancakes, duck, goose and sack,
    Rabit, capon, hen, turkey, and a wooden jack.
    In this same street before the Temple made,
    There seems to be a brisk and lively trade:
    Where ev’ry booth hath such a cunning sign,
    As seldome hath been seen in former time;[1]

    And there, if you have money for to spend,
    Each cunning snap will seem to be your friend.
    There may you see small vessels under sail,
    All’s one to them, with or against the gale,
    And as they pass they little guns do fire,
    Which feedeth some, and puffs them with desire
    To sail therein, and when their money’s gone,
    ’Tis right, they cry, the Thames to come upon.
    There on a sign you may most plainly see’t,
    Here’s the first tavern built in Freezeland-street:
    There is bull-baiting and bear-baiting too,
    That no man living yet e’re found so true;
    And foot-ball play is there so common grown,
    That on the Thames before was never known;
    Coals being dear, are carry’d on men’s backs,
    And some on sledges these are drawn in sacks;
    Men do on horse-back ride from shore to shore,
    Which formerly in boats were wafted o’re:
    Poor people hard shifts make for livelihoods,
    And happy are if they can sell their goods;
    What you can buy for three-pence on the shore,
    Will cost you four-pence on the Thames or more.
    Now let me come to things more strange, yet true,
    And question not what I declare to you;
    There rosted was a great and well-fed oxe,
    And there, with dogs, hunted the cunning fox;
    Dancing o’th’ ropes, and puppit plays likewise,
    The like before ne’er seen beneath the skies;
    All stand admir’d, and very well they may,
    To see such pastimes, and such sort of play.
    Besides the things I nam’d to you before,
    There other toys and baubles are great store;
    There you may feast your wandring eyes enough,
    There you may buy a box to hold your snuff.
    No fair no market underneath the skies
    That can afford you more varieties;
    There you may see some hundreds slide in skeets,
    And beaten paths like to the city streets.
    There were Dutch whimsies turned swiftly round
    Faster then horses run on level ground.
    The like to this I now to you do tell
    No former age could ever parallel;
    There’s all that can supply most curious minds,
    With such varieties of cunning signs
    That I do think no man doth understand;
    Such merry fancies ne’r were on the land;
    There is such whimsies on the frozen ice,
    Make some believe the Thames a Paridice.
    And though these sights be to our admiration
    Yet our sins, our sins, do call for lamentation.
    Though such unusual frosts to us are strange,
    Perhaps it may predict some greater change;
    And some do fear may a fore-runner be
    Of an approaching sad mortality:
    But why should we to such belief incline?
    There’s none that knows but the blest Pow’r divine
    And whatsoe’re is from Jehovah sent,
    Poor sinners ought therewith to be content;
    If dreadfull, then to fall upon the knee,
    And beg remission of the Deity;
    But if beyond our thoughts he sends us store,
    With all our hearts let’s thankful be therefore.
    Now let us all in great Jehovah trust
    Who doth preserve the righteous and the just;
    And eke conclude sin is the cause of all
    The heavy judgments that on us do fall:
    And call to mind, fond man, thy time mispent,
    Fall on thy knees, and heartily repent;
    Then will thy Saviour pity take on thee,
    And thou shalt live to all eternity.

    Printed by M. Haly and J. Miller, and sold by Robert Waltor, at
    the Globe, on the north side of St. Paul’s Church, near that
    end towards Ludgate, where you may have all sorts and sizes of
    maps, coppy-books, and prints, not only in English, but Italian,
    French, and Dutch; and by John Seller, on the west side of the
    Royal Exchange. 1684.

    [1] Two lines omitted.

The foregoing is illustrated with a quaint wood-cut, roughly executed. It
is reproduced in Mr. Mason Jackson’s “Pictorial Press,” (London, 1885),
and by his courtesy we are able to include it in this work.

[Illustration: FROST FAIR ON THE THAMES.

Copy of an engraving from a broadside entitled: “_Great Britain’s Wonder,
London’s Admiration. Being a True Representation of a prodigious Frost,
which began about the beginning of December, 1683 and continued till the
fourth day of February following._” _etc._]

The following is a copy of a broadside preserved in the Ashmolean Museum.
It was printed for J. Shad, London, in 1684.

    A WINTER WONDER; OR THE THAMES FROZEN OVER, WITH REMARKS ON THE
    RESORT THERE.

    WHEN Neptune saw a wondrous bridge built o’er
    His silver Thames, that reach’d from shore to shore,
    He shook his trident and with aweful frown,
    Swore ’twas presumption in the haughty town,
    Now laughs to see it standing useless o’re,
    Whilst ice has made it one continued shore,
    Under whose spreading roof he silent glides
    And ebbs, and hews, unheard, unseen, his tides.
    Greenland, Muscovy, sure their cold have lent,
    And all their frigid blasts have hither sent,
    Whilst Boreas with his keenest breath has blown,
    To make our winter cold as is there own:
    That if my inke was not congeal’d as it,
    I’de on the subject shew a poet’s wit.
    The fish lye closely in their watry bed,
    And find an icy ceiling o’re their head.
    They fear no anglers that do lye in wait,
    Nor are deceived by the alluring bait.
    The watermen with folded arms doe stand,
    And grieve to see the water firm as land,
    Their boats hal’d up, their oars laid useless by,
    Nor oars, nor skuller, master, do they cry,
    Wishing kind Zephyrus with a warmer gale
    Would once more launch their boat and fill their sail;
    Or that the sun would with his gentle flames
    Again set free their best of friends, the Thames.
    The shoars no longer sound with Westward hoe,
    Nor need men boats where they can firmly goe.
    See how the noble river in a trice
    Is turned as it were one spacious street of ice.
    And who’ld believe to see revived there,
    In January, Bartholomew fair.
    Where all the mobile in crowds resort,
    As on firm land, to walk, and trade, and sport;
    Now booths do stand where boats did lately row,
    And on its surface up and down men go,
    And Thames becomes a kind of raree-show.
    Its upper rooms are let to mortal dweller,
    And underneath it is god Neptune’s cellar;
    Now Vulcan makes his fires on Neptune’s bed,
    And sawcy cooks roast beef upon his head,
    As many tuns of ale and brandy flow
    Above the ice, as water do below;
    And folk do tipple, without fear to sink,
    More liquors then the fish beneath do drink.
    Here you may see a crowd of people flock,
    One’s heels fly up, and down he’s on his dock;
    Another steps, ’tis strange but true, no matter,
    And in he flounces up to th’ neck in water;
    And third more sure his slipp’ry footsteps guides,
    And safely o’er the ice away he slides;
    Another upon skeats does swiftly pass,
    Cutting the ice like diamonds upon glass.
    Women, beware you come not here at all,
    You are most like to slip and catch a fall,
    This you may do, tho’ in your gallant’s hand,
    And if you fall, he has no power to stand;
    Tis ten to one you tumble in a trice,
    For you are apt to fall where there’s no ice,
    Oft on your back, but seldome on your face,
    How can you stand then on such a slippery place?
    Yet you will venture briskly to a booth,
    To take a glass or two with youngster Smooth,
    Then back again as briskly to the shore,
    As wise and honest as you were before.
    Here (like the great) on slip’ry place you stand,
    They can nor fate, nor you your feet, command.
    My muse to scribble further has no maw,
    But for your good doe wish a speedy thaw,
    And let it ne’r be said ’twixt you and I,
    The winter’s cold, but move your charity.
    Then let the poor meanwhile your bounty find,
    And heav’n to you, as you to them prove kind.

The title of another broadside was the “Wonders of the Deep,” illustrated
with a rude wood-cut, representing the Frost Fair. This intimated that it
was “an exact Representation of the River Thames, as it appeared during
the memorable Frost, which began about the middle of December, and ended
on the 28th of February, anno 1683-4.” The lines under the picture are as
follow:--

    THE WONDERS OF THE DEEP.

    The various sports behold here in this piece,
    Which for six weeks were seen upon the ice;
    Upon the Thames the great variety
    Of plays and booths is here brought to your eye.
    Here coaches, as in Cheapside, run on wheels,
    Here men (out-tipling of the fishes) reels:
    Instead of waves that us’d to beat the shore,
    Here bulls they bait, till loudly they do roar;
    Here boats do slide, where boats were wont to row,
    Where ships did sail, the sailors do them tow;
    And passengers in boats the river crost,
    For the same price as ’twas before the frost.
    There is the printing booth of wonderous fame,
    Because that each man there did print his name;
    And sure, in former ages, ne’re was found,
    A press to print, where men so oft were drown’d.
    In blanket booths, that sit at no ground rent,
    Much coin in beef and brandy there is spent.
    The Dutchmen here in nimble cutting scates,
    To please the crowd do shew their tricks and feats;
    The rabble here in chariots run around,
    Coffee, and tea, and mum, doth here abound,
    The tinkers here doth march at sound of kettle,
    And all men know that they are men of mettle:
    Here roasted was an ox before the court,
    Which to much folks afforded meat and sport;
    At nine-pins here they play, as in Moorfields,
    This place the pass-time us of foot-ball yields:
    The common hunt here makes another show,
    As he to hunt an hare is wont to go;
    But though no woods are here or hares so fleet.
    Yet men do often foxes catch and meet;
    Into a hole here one by chance doth fall,
    At which the watermen began to bawl,
    What, will you rob our cellar of its drink?
    When he, alas! poor man, no harm did think.
    Here men well mounted do on horses ride
    Here they do throw at cocks as at Shrovetide;
    A chariot here so cunningly was made,
    That it did move itself without the aid
    Of horse or rope, by virtue of a spring
    That Vulcan did contrive, who wrought therein.
    The rocks at nine-holes here do flock together
    As they are wont to do in summer weather.
    Three ha’perth for a penny, here they cry,
    Of gingerbread, come, who will of it buy?
    This is the booth where men did money take,
    For crape and ribbons that they there did make;
    But in six hours, this great and rary show
    Of booths and pastimes all away did go.

    Printed in the year 1684.

[Sidenote: 1683-4]

In the parish register of Holy-rood Church, Southampton, is the following
record of this winter’s remarkable frost:

“1683-4 This yeare was a great Frost, which began before Christmasse, soe
that yᵉ 3rd and 4th dayes of this month February yᵉ River of Southampton
was frossen all over and covered with ice from Calshott Castle to
Redbridge and Tho: Martaine maʳ of a vessell went upon yᵉ ice from Berry
near Marchwood to Milbrook-point. And yᵉ river at Ichen Ferry was so
frossen over that severall persons went from Beauvois-hill to Bittern
Farme, forwards and backwards.”

The following curious extract is from the Parochial Register at Ubley,
near Wrington: “In the yeare 1683 was a mighty great frost, the like was
not seene in England for many ages. It came upon a very deep snow, which
fell imediately after Christmas, and it continued untill a Lady-day. The
ground was not open nor the snow cleane gone off the earth in thirteene
weeks. Somm of the snow remained at mindipe till midsummer. It was soe
deepe and driven with the winde a gainst the hedges and stiles, that the
next morning after it fell men could not goe to their grounds to serve
their cattell without great danger of being buried, for it was above head
and shoulders in many places--sum it did burie--did betooken the burieing
of many more which came to pass before the end of the yeare; but in few
days the frost came soe fearce, that people did goe upon the top of it
over wals and stiles as on levell ground, not seeing hardly where they
was, and many men was forced to keep their cattell untill the last, in
the same ground that they was in at first, because they could not drive
them to any other place, and did hew the ice every day for water, by
reason of the sharpness of the frost and the deepness of the snow. Som
that was travelling on mindipe did travell till they could travell no
longer, and then lye down and dye, but mortality did prevaill most among
them that could travell worst, the sharpness of the season tooke off the
most parte of them that was aged and of them that was under infermities,
the people did die so fast, that it was the greatest parte of their work
(which was appointed to doe that worke) to burie the dead; it being a
day’s work for two men, or two days’ work for one man, to make a grave.
It was almost as hard a work to hew a grave out, in the earth, as in the
rock, the frost was a foot and halfe and two foot deepe in the dry earth,
and where there was moister and watter did runn, the ice was a yard and
fower foot thick, in soe much that ye people did keepe market on the
River at London; ‘God doth scatter his ice like morsels, man cannot abide
his cold.’--Psalme, 147, 17.”

The following are particulars of the chief publications issued in
connection with this frost:--

A large copper-plate, entitled “A Map of the River Thames, merrily call’d
Blanket Fair, as it was frozen in the memorable year 1683-4, describing
the booths, footpaths, coaches, sledges, bull-baiting, and other remarks
upon that famous river.” Dedicated to Sir Henry Hulse, Knt., and Lord
Mayor, by James Moxon, the engraver.

“A wonderfull Fair, or a Fair of Wonders; being new and true illustration
and description of the several things acted and done on the river of
Thames in the time of the terrible frost, which began about the beginning
of Dec., 1683, and continued till Feb. 4, and held on with such violence,
that men and beasts, coaches and sledges, went common thereon. There was
also a street of booths from the Temple to Southwark, where was sold all
sorts of goods; likewise bull-baiting and an ox roasted whole, and many
other things, as the map and description do plainly show.” Engraved and
printed on a sheet, 1684.

A small copper-plate representation of Frost Fair, with the figure of
Erra Pater in the foreground. At the top, are the words, “Erra Pater’s
Prophesy, or Frost Faire in 1683,” and underneath, the following lines:

    “Old Erra Pater, or his rambling ghost,
    Prognosticating of this long strong frost,
    Some ages past, said yᵗ yᵉ ice-bound Thames,
    Shou’d prove a theatre for sports and games;
    Her watry green be turn’d into a bare,
    For men a citty seem, for booths a faire;
    And now the straggling sprite is once more come
    To visit mortalls and foretel their doom.
    When maids grow modest, yᵉ dissenting crew
    Become all loyal, the falsehearted true,
    Then you may probably, and not till then,
    Expect in England such a frost again.”

    _Printed for James Norris, at the King’s Armes, without Temple
    Barr._

[Sidenote: 1688-89]

Timbs, in his “Curiosities of London,” records a great frost, lasting
from 20th December to 6th February. Pools were frozen eighteen
inches thick, and the Thames ice was covered with streets of shops,
bull-baiting, shows and tricks; hackney coaches plied on the ice-roads,
and a coach with six horses was driven from Whitehall almost to London
Bridge; yet in two days all the ice disappeared.

[Sidenote: 1709]

The Thames frozen over, and some persons crossed it on the ice. In the
Crowle Pennant is a coarse bill, within a wood-cut border of rural
subjects, bearing the inscription, “Mr. John Heaton, printed on the
Thames at Westminster, January 7th, 1709.” The frost lasted three months.
It is somewhat remarkable to find that there was very little frost this
year in Scotland and Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1715-16]

Thames again frozen over. At the time of this frost an advertisement
appeared as follows: “This is to give notice to gentlemen and others
that pass upon the Thames during this frost, that over against
Whitehall-stairs they may have their names printed, fit to paste in any
book, to hand down the memory of the season to future ages.

    You that walk there, and do desyn to tell
    Your children’s children what this year befell,
    Go print your names, and take a dram within;
    For such a year as this, has seldom been.”

The following account of this frost is drawn from _Dawks’s News-Letter_
of January 14th, 1716: “The Thames seems now a solid rock of ice; and
booths for the sale of brandy, wine, ale, and other exhilarating liquors,
have been for some time fixed thereon; but now it is in a manner like a
town: thousands of people cross it, and with wonder view the mountainous
heaps of water, that now lie congealed into ice. On Thursday, a great
cook’s-shop was erected, and gentlemen went as frequently to dine there,
as at any ordinary.”

“Over against Westminster, Whitehall, and Whitefriars, Printing-presses
are kept upon the ice, where many persons have their names printed, to
transmit the wonders of the season to posterity.”

It is further recorded of the Thames that “coaches, waggons, carts, &c.,
were driven on it, and an enthusiastic preacher held forth to a motley
congregation on the mighty waters, with a zeal fiery enough to have
thawed himself through the ice, had it been susceptible to religious
warmth. This, with other pastimes and diversions, attracted the attention
of many of the nobility, and even brought the Prince of Wales, to visit
Frost Fair. On that day, there was an uncommonly high spring-tide, which
overflowed the cellars on the banks of the river, and raised the ice
full fourteen feet, without interrupting the people from their pursuits.
The _Protestant Packet_ of this period, observes that the theatres
were almost deserted. The _News-letter_ of February 15, announces the
dissolution of the ice, and with it the ‘baseless fabric’ on which Momus
had held his temporary reign; the above paper then proclaims the good
fare, and various articles to be seen, and purchased.”

    “Thou beauteous River Thames, whose standing tide
    Equals the glory of thy flowing pride,
    The city, nay the world’s transferr’d to thee
    Fin’d as the land, and richer than the sea.
    The various metals, Nature can produce,
    Or Art improve, for ornament or use,
    From the Earth’s deepest bowels brought are made
    To shine in thee, and carry on thy trade.
    Here Guilledum, fam’d for making silver pass
    Through various forms; and Sparks as fam’d for brass,
    There’s T⸺ ’tween God and gold who ne’er stood neater,
    And trusty Nicholson, who lives by pewter,
    Wrote o’er their doors, having affix’d their names,
    We under-writ, remov’d are to the Thames.
    There miles together for the common good
    The Slippery Substance offers dainty food.
    Here healing Port-wine, and there Rhenish flows,
    Here Bohea Tea, and there Tobacco grows.
    In one place you may meet good Cheshire cheese,
    Another proffers, whitest Brentford peas:
    Here is King George’s picture, there Queen Anne’s,
    Now nut-brown ale in cups, and then in canns:
    One sells an Oxford dram as good as can be,
    Another offers General Peper’s brandy.
    See! there’s the Mall, and in that little hut
    The best Geneva’s sold, and live to boot,
    See there, a sleek Venetian Envoy walks;
    See here, an Alderman more proudly stalks.
    Behold the French Ambassador, that’s he;
    And this the honest Sire, and Captain Leigh.
    Here is St. James’s street, yonder the Strand:
    In this place Bowyer plies; that’s Lintot’s stand.”

The chief illustrations of this frost are as follows:--

A copper plate representing London Bridge on the right hand, and a line
of tents on the left, leading from Temple Stairs. In front, another
line of tents, marked “Thames Street,” and the various sports, &c.,
before them: below the print are alphabetical references, with the words
“Printed on the Thames, 1715-16;” and above it, “Frost Fair on the River
Thames.”

A copper-plate of much larger dimensions, representing London at St.
Paul’s, with the tents, &c., and with alphabetical references; “Printed
and sold by John Bowles, at the Black Horse, in Cornhill.” In the
right-hand corner above, the arms and supporters of the City; and on the
left a cartouche, with the words “Frost Fayre, being a True Prospect
of the Great Varietie of Shops and Booths for Tradesmen, with other
Curiosities and Humors, on the Frozen River of Thames, as it appeared
before the City of London, in that memorable Frost in yᵉ year of the
Reigne of Our Sovereigne Lord King George, Anno Domini 1716.”

“An exact and lively View of the Booths, and all the variety of Shows,
&c., on the ice, with an alphabetical explanation of the most remarkable
figures, 1716.” A copper-plate.

“Frost Fair; or a View of the Booths on the Frozen Thames in the 2nd year
of King George, 1716.” A wood-cut.

[Sidenote: 1739]

The following is a list of the most important memorials of this famous
frost fair:--

A copper-plate, representing a view of the Thames at Westminster, with
the tents, sports, &c., and alphabetical references, entitled “Ice
Fair.” Printed on yᵉ River Thames, now frozen over. Jan. 31, 1739-40.

    “Amidst yᵉ arts yᵗ on yᵉ Thames appear,
    To tell yᵉ wonders of this frozen year.
    Sculpture claims prior place, since yᵗ alone,
    Preserves yᵉ image when yᵉ prospect’s gone.”

A coarse copper-plate, entitled “The view of Frost Fair,”--scene taken
from York-buildings Water Works; twelve verses beneath.

A small copper-plate, representing an altar-piece with ten commandments,
engraven between the figures of Moses and Aaron; and beneath, on a
cartouche, “Printed on the Ice, on the River of Thames, Janʳʸ 15, 1739.”

A small copper-plate, representing an ornamental border with a female
head, crowned at the top; and below two designs of the letter press
and rolling press. In the centre, in type, “Upon the Frost in the year
1739-40,” six verses, and then, “Mr. John Cross, aged 6. Printed on the
ice upon the Thames, at Queen-Hithe, January the 29th, 1739-40.”

    “Behold the liquid Thames now frozen o’er,
    That lately ships of mighty burden bore;
    Here you may print your name, tho’ cannot write,
    ’Cause numb’d with cold; ’tis done with great delight.
    And lay it by, that ages yet to come,
    May see what things upon the ice were done.”

A coarse copper-plate engraving, looking down the river, entitled “Frost
Fair,” with eight lines of verse beneath, and above, “Printed upon the
River Thames when frozen, Janu. the 28, 1739-40.”

“An Extract Draught of Frost Fair on the River Thames, as it appears
from Whitehall Stairs, in the year 1740,” with twelve lines of verse
underneath. “Printed and sold by Geoᵉ Foster, Printseller, in St. Paul’s
Church-yard, London.”

“The English Chronicle, or Frosty Kalender; a broadside containing a
memorial of the principal frosts, with a view of the fair from the
Southwark side of the river, opposite St. Paul’s. Printed on the Thames,
1739-40.”

[Sidenote: 1739-40]

The winter of 1739-40 was one of great severity. The frost commenced on
Christmas-day, and lasted until the 17th February following. It caused
much distress amongst the poor, coals could hardly be obtained for
money, and water was equally scarce. It is recorded that “the watermen
and fishermen, with a peterboat in mourning, and the carpenters,
bricklayers, &c., with their tools and utensils in mourning, walked
through the streets in large bodies, imploring relief for their own and
families’ necessities; and, to the honour of the British character, this
was liberally bestowed. Subscriptions were also made in the different
parishes, and great benefactions bestowed by the opulent, through which
the calamities of the season were much mitigated. A few days after the
frost had set in, great damage was done among the shipping in the river
Thames by a high wind, which broke many vessels from their moorings, and
drove them foul of each other, while the large sheets of ice that floated
on the stream, overwhelmed various boats and lighters, and sunk several
corn and coal vessels. By these accidents many lives were lost; and many
others were also destroyed by the intensity of the cold, both on land and
water.

Above the Bridge, the Thames was completely frozen over, and tents and
numerous booths were erected on it for selling liquors, &c., to the
multitudes that daily flocked thither for curiosity or diversion. The
scene here displayed was very irregular, and had more the appearance of
a fair on land, than of a frail exhibition, the only basis of which was
congealed water.”

Sports were enjoyed on the ice, and shops opened for the sale of fancy
articles, food and drink. A printing press was in active operation, and
amongst the papers printed was the following:

    The noble Art and mystery of Printing, was first invented by
    J. Faust, 1441, and publicly practised by John Gottenburgh, a
    soldier of Mentz, in High Germany, anno. 1450. King Henry VI.
    (anno. 1457) sent two private messengers with fifteen hundred
    marks, to procure one of the workmen. These prevailed on
    Frederick Corsellis to leave the Printing-house in disguise; who
    immediately came over with them, and first instructed the English
    in this most famous Art, at Oxford, in the year 1459.

    WILLIAM NOBLE, M.A.

    Amidst the Arts which on the THAMES appear
    To tell the wonders of this _icy_ year,
    PRINTING claims prior place, which at one view
    Erects a monument of THAT and YOU.

    Printed upon the river Thames, Jan. 29th, in the thirteenth year
    of the reign of King George the IId. Anno Dom. 1740.

“Some venturers in the Strand,” says Timbs, “bought a large ox in
Smithfield, to be roasted whole on the ice; and one, Hodgeson, claimed
the privilege of felling or knocking down the beast as a right inherent
in his family, his father having knocked down the one roasted on the
river in the Great Frost, 1684, near Hungerford Stairs: Hodgeson to wear
a laced cambric apron, a silver-handled steel, and a hat and feathers.”

At the thaw a number of persons fell victims to their rashness, amongst
those who lost their lives may be mentioned _Doll_, the noted pippin
woman. Gay, in his “Trivia,” book ii, thus alludes to her death:--

    “Doll every day had walk’d these treacherous roads;
    Her neck grew warp’d beneath autumnal loads
    Of various fruit; she now a basket bore;
    That head, alas! shall basket bear no more.
    Each booth she frequent past, in quest of gain;
    And boys with pleasure heard her thrilling strain.
    Ah, Doll! all mortals must resign their breath,
    And industry itself submit to death!
    The cracking crystal yields: she sinks, she dies,--
    Her head chopt from her lost shoulders, flies;
    Pippins, she cried, but death her voice confounds,
    And pip, pip, pip, along the ice resounds.”

Many of the houses which, at this period, stood on London Bridge, as well
as the bridge itself, sustained considerable damage.

Thomas Gent, the celebrated printer and historian, in his Life, relates
how he set up a printing press on the river Ouse at York during this
frost. “In January, 1739,” [1740 n.s.] he says, “the frost having been
extremely intense, the river became so frozen, that I printed names
upon the ice. It was a dangerous spot on the south side of the bridge,
where I first set up, as it were, a kind of press--only a roller wrapped
about with blankets. Whilst reading the verses I had made to follow
the names--wherein King George was most loyally inserted--some soldiers
round about made great acclamation, with other good people; but the ice
suddenly cracking, they almost as quickly ran away, whilst I, who did not
hear well, neither guessed the meaning, fell to work, and wondered at
them as much for retiring so precipitately as they did at me for staying;
but, taking courage, they shortly returned back, brought company, and I
took some pence amongst them. After this I moved my shop to and fro, to
the great satisfaction of young gentlemen and ladies, and others, who
were very liberal on the occasion.”

It will not, we think, be without interest to reproduce particulars of a
palace which was built solely of ice at this period. “In the year 1740,
the Empress Anne of Russia, caused a palace of ice to be erected upon
the banks of the Neva. This extraordinary edifice was fifty-two feet in
length, sixteen in breadth, and twenty feet high, and constructed of
large pieces of ice cut in the manner of freestone. The walls were three
feet thick. The several apartments were furnished with tables, chairs,
beds, and all kinds of household furniture of ice. In front of this
edifice, besides pyramids and statues, stood six cannon, carrying balls
of six pounds weight, and two mortars, entirely made of ice. As a trial
from one of the former, a cannon ball, with only a quarter of a pound of
powder, was fired off, the ball of which went through a two-inch board,
at sixty paces from the mouth of the piece, which remained completely
uninjured by the explosion. The illumination of this palace at night was
astonishingly grand.”

[Sidenote: 1741]

“All frost or rain from 15th September to 1st February.”

[Sidenote: 1742]

A severe frost for some weeks. It is recorded in the _Gentleman’s
Magazine_, 18 December, 1742: “The frost having continued near three
weeks, the streets in some parts of the city, though there had been no
snow, were rendered very incommodious, and several accidents happened.”

[Sidenote: 1754]

A very severe frost this year, especially at Bath and in the south-west
of England.

[Sidenote: 1763]

The frost lasted ninety-four days. According to the _Gentleman’s
Magazine_ it set in on Saturday, 25th December, 1762. It is thus
described: “A most intense frost with easterly wind, which has since
continued, with very little intermission, until the end of January. Some
experiments have been tried during the course of it, which prove that
on some days it was no less severe than that of 1740, though upon the
whole it has not been attended with the same calamitous circumstances.
On Friday, 31st December, a glass of water placed upon the table in the
open air, in six minutes froze so hard as to bear 5 shillings upon it; a
glass of red port wine placed upon the same table froze in two hours; and
a glass of brandy in six, both with hard ice.” It is mentioned that in
Cornwall, Wales, and Ireland, this frost was felt but slightly.

[Sidenote: 1767-68]

Both these years opened with severe frosts, which caused provisions to
increase greatly in price. Navigation on the Thames was suspended, and
great damage done to the small craft by the ice. It is chronicled that
“many persons perished by the severity of the weather, both on the water
and on the shore. During the latter frost, the price of butchers’ meat
grew so exorbitant that the Hon. Thomas Harley, Lord Mayor, proposed that
bounties should be given for bringing fish to Billingsgate market; and
this plan having been carried into effect, the distresses of the poor
were greatly alleviated, by the cheap rates at which the markets were
supplied.”

We read in White’s “Selborne,” under date of January, 1768: “We have had
very severe frost and deep snow this month; my thermometer was one day
14½ degrees below freezing point, within doors. The tender evergreens
were injured pretty much. It was very providential that the air was
still, and the ground well covered with snow, else vegetation in general
must have suffered prodigiously. There is reason to believe that some
days were more severe than any since the year 1739-40.” The frost this
year was very severe in Scotland.

[Sidenote: 1776]

The following “Icy Epitaph” is said to be from the graveyard of Bampton,
Devonshire:--

    In memory of the Clerk’s son,
    Bless my i, i, i, i, i, i,
          Here I lies
          In a sad pickle
          Killed by an icicle,
    In the year of Anno Domini 1776.

[Sidenote: 1782]

The Plymouth correspondent of the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ wrote under date
of 16th February, 1782: “The most intense frost ever known … The grass,
which on Friday was as green and flourishing as if it had been midsummer,
on Sunday morning seemed to be entirely killed. This is mentioned by our
correspondent as very unusual in that part of the country; and the snow
lay on the ground in many places.”

[Sidenote: 1783-84]

The frost lasted eighty-nine days. It commenced in December, continued
through January and February, and in March there was snow, and cold
cutting winds. We gather from the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ that it was
general. In the February number it is reported: “From different parts of
the country we have accounts of more persons having been found dead in
the roads, and others dug out of the snow, than ever was known in any
one year in the memory of man.” On January 6th, “Thames not quite frozen
over, but navigation stopped by ice.” The frost from the 10th to 20th
February was extremely severe. The Thames frozen and traffic crossed in
several places.

On the fifth bell of Tadcaster peal is recorded: “It is remarkable that
these bells were moulded in the great frost, 1783. C. and R. Dalton,
Fownders, York.”

[Sidenote: 1784]

In the _Gentleman’s Magazine_ for February the following appears: “From
10th December, 1783, to this day it has been 63 days’ frost; of these it
snowed nineteen, and twelve days’ thaw, whereof it rained nine. Had the
frost continued at 13 degrees as on the 31st December during the night,
it would have frozen over the Thames in twenty-four hours.”

[Sidenote: 1788-89]

On the 25th November, 1788, a frost set in which lasted seven weeks. It
is recorded that the thermometer stood at eleven degrees below freezing
point in the very midst of the city. The Thames was frozen below London
Bridge, and the ice on the river assumed all the appearance of a frost
fair. A variety of amusements were provided for the visitors, including
puppet-shows and the exhibition of wild beasts. In the _Gentleman’s
Magazine_ for 1789 the following diary of remarkable events which
transpired during this frost, is given:--

“Saturday, January 10, 1789--Thirteen men brought a waggon with a ton
of coals from Loughborough in Leicestershire, to Carlton House, as a
present to His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales. As soon as they were
emptied into the cellars, Mr. Weltjie, clerk of the cellars, gave them
four guineas, and as soon as the Prince was informed of it, his Highness
sent them twenty guineas, and ordered them a pot of beer each man. They
performed their journey, which is 111 miles, in 11 days, and drew it all
the way without any relief.

Monday 12.--A young bear was baited on the ice, opposite to Redriff,
which drew multitudes together, and fortunately no accident happened to
interrupt their sport.

Tuesday 13.--The Prince of Wales transmitted £1000 to the Chamberlain for
the benefit of the poor, during the severe frost.

Saturday 17.--The captain of a vessel lying off Rotherhithe, the better
to secure the ship’s cables, made an agreement with a publican for
fastening a cable to his premises; in consequence, a small anchor was
carried on shore and deposited in the cellar, while another cable was
fastened round a beam in another part of the house. In the night the ship
veered about, and the cables holding fast, carried away the beam and
levelled the house with the ground; by which accident five persons asleep
in their beds were killed.”

In the Common Place Notes for February, 1789, is the following:--“With
the new year, new entertainments commenced, or more properly speaking,
old sports were revived in the neighbourhood of London. The river Thames,
which at this season usually exhibits a dreary scene of languor and
indolence, was this year the stage on which there were all kinds of
diversions, bear-baiting, festivals, pigs and sheep roasted, booths,
turnabouts, and all the various amusements of Bartholomew fair multiplied
and improved; from Putney-bridge in Middlesex, down to Redriff, was one
continued scene of merriment and jollity; not a gloomy face to be seen,
nor a countenance expressive of want; but all cheerfulness, originating
apparently from business and bustle. From this description the reader
is not, however, to conclude that all was as it seemed. The miserable
inhabitants that dwelt in houses on both sides the river during these
thoughtless exhibitions, were many of them experiencing extreme misery;
destitute of employment, though industrious, they were with families of
helpless children, for want of employment, pining for want of bread; and
though in no country in the world the rich are more benevolent than in
England, yet their benefactions could bear no proportion to the wants of
numerous poor, who could not all partake of the common bounty. It may,
however, be truly said, that in no great city or country on the continent
of Europe, the poor suffered less from the rigour of the season, than
the inhabitants of Great Britain and London. Yet even in London, the
distresses of the poor were very great; and though liberal subscriptions
were raised for their relief, many perished through want and cold.

On this occasion, the City of London subscribed fifteen hundred pounds
towards supporting those persons who were not in the habit of receiving
alms.”

We cull from the _Public Advertiser_ of January 15th, 1789, the following
piece of drollery, in the shape of an inscription on a temporary
building on the Thames: “This Booth to Let. The present possessor of the
Premises is Mr. Frost. His affairs, however, not being on a permanent
footing, a dissolution, or bankruptcy may soon be expected, and a final
settlement of the whole entrusted to Mr. Thaw.”

The printing-press was again at work on the ice, and in Crowle’s
“Illustrated Pennant,” there is a bill, having a border of type flowers,
containing the following lines:--

    “The silver Thames was frozen o’er,
    No difference twixt the stream and shore;
    The like no man hath seen before,
    Except he lived in days of yore.”

“On the Ice, at the Thames Printing-Office, opposite St. Catherine’s
Stairs, in the severe Frost January, 1789. Printed by me, William Bailey.”

In the same collection is a stippled engraving entitled: “A View of the
Thames from Rotherhithe Stairs, during the frost in 1789. Painted by G.
Samuel, and engraved by W. Birch, enamel-painter.”

The end of the Fair we find thus described in the _London Chronicle_
of January 15th, 1789, “Perhaps the breaking up of the fair upon the
Thames last Tuesday night below bridge, exceeded every idea that could
be formed of it, as it was not until after the dusk of the evening that
the busy crowd was persuaded of the approach of a thaw. This, however,
with the crackling of some ice about eight o’clock, made the whole a
scene of the most perfect confusion; as men, beasts, booths, turnabouts,
puppet-shows, &c., &c., were all in motion, and pouring towards the shore
on each side. The confluence here was so sudden and impetuous, that the
watermen who had formed the toll-bars over the sides of the river, where
they had broken the ice for that purpose, not being able to maintain
their standard from the crowd, &c., pulled up the boards, by which a
number of persons who could not leap, or were borne down by the press,
were soused up to the middle.”

The next issue of the paper records that “on Thursday, January 15th, the
ice was so powerful as to cut the cables of two vessels lying at the old
Rose Chair, and drive them through the great arch of London bridge; when
their masts becoming entangled with the balustrades, both were broken and
many persons hurt.” The river remained frozen for some time after this.

[Sidenote: 1795-96]

The Antiquarian Society of Newcastle-on-Tyne recorded that the ice on the
river Tyne was twenty inches thick. The Thames frozen.

[Sidenote: 1809]

We find in “Frostiana” the following particulars of the curious effect
of cold on the feathered tribe:--“In February, 1809, a boy, in the
service of Mr. W. Newman, miller, at Leybourne, near Malling, went into
a field, called the Forty Acres, and saw a number of rooks on the ground
very close together. He made a noise to drive them away, but they did
not appear alarmed; he threw snow-balls to make them rise, still they
remained. Surprised at this apparent indifference, he went in among them,
and actually picked up twenty-seven rooks; and also in several parts of
the same field, ninety larks, a pheasant, and a buzzard hawk. The cause
of the inactivity of the birds, was a thing of rare occurrence in this
climate; a heavy rain fell on Thursday afternoon, which, freezing as it
came down, so completely glazed over the bodies of the birds, that they
were fettered in a coat of ice, and completely deprived of the power
of motion. Several of the larks were dead, having perished from the
intensity of the cold. The buzzard hawk being strong, struggled hard for
his liberty, broke his icy fetters and effected his escape.”

[Sidenote: 1811]

In January this year the Thames frozen over.--_Timbs._

[Sidenote: 1813-14]

On the evening of the 27th of December, 1813, a great fog commenced in
London, and the greatest frost of the century set in. We have taken from
a work compiled during the frost, the following reliable account of it:--

“On the night of 27th the darkness was so dense that the Prince Regent,
who desired to pay a visit to the Marquis of Salisbury at Hatfield House,
was obliged to return back to Carlton House, not, however, until one of
his outriders had fallen into a ditch on the side of Kentish Town. The
short excursion occupied several hours. Mr. Croker, of the Admiralty,
intending to go northward, wandered in the dark for some hours without
making more than three or four miles progress.”

On the night of the 28th of December, the Maidenhead coach, on its return
from town, missed the road near Harford Bridge, and was overturned.
Amongst the injured passengers was Lord Hawarden.

It took, on the 29th of December, the Birmingham mail nearly seven hours
in going a couple of miles past Uxbridge, or a distance of about twenty
miles.

On this and other evenings in London, a couple of persons with links ran
by each horse’s head; yet with this and other precautions some serious
and many whimsical accidents occurred. Pedestrians even carried links or
lanterns, and a number who were not provided with lights lost themselves
in the most frequented and at other times well-known streets. Hackney
coachmen mistook the pathway for the road, and _vice versa_--the greatest
possible confusion took place.

The state of the Metropolis on the night of the 31st of December was in
consequence truly alarming. It required both great care and knowledge of
the public streets to enable anyone to proceed any distance, and those
obliged to venture out carried torches. The usual lamps appeared through
the haze not larger than small candles. Many of the hackney coachmen led
their horses, and others drove only at walking pace. Until the 3rd of
January, 1814, lasted this tremendous fog, or “darkness that might be
felt.”

Immediately on the cessation of the fogs, a heavy fall of snow commenced.
A writer of the time said, “There is nothing in the memory of man to
equal these falls.” With the exception of a few short intervals, the snow
continued incessantly for forty-eight hours, and this, too, after the
ground was covered with a condensation, the result of nearly four weeks’
continued frost. Nearly the whole of the time the wind blew from the
north and north-east, and was intensely cold.

The state of the streets was rendered dangerous by a thaw which lasted
about a day. The mass of snow and water became so thick, that it was
with difficulty that the carriages could progress even with the aid of
an additional horse each. Nearly all trades and callings carried on out
of doors were stopped, which considerably increased the distress of
the lower orders. The frost continued and skating occupied the chief
attention of the people. It will be interesting to furnish an account of
the state of the river Thames at this period.

Sunday, January 30th: Immense masses of ice that had floated from the
upper parts of the river, in consequence of the thaw on the two preceding
days, now blocked up the Thames between Blackfriars and London Bridges,
and afforded every probability of its being frozen over in a day or two.
Some venturous persons even now walked on different parts of the ice.

Monday, January 31st: This expectation was realised. During the whole
of the afternoon, hundreds of people were assembled on Blackfriars and
London Bridges, to see several adventurous men cross and recross the
Thames on the ice; at one time seventy persons were counted walking from
Queenhithe to the opposite shore. The frost on Sunday night so united
the vast mass as to render it immovable by the tide.

Tuesday, February 1st: The floating masses of ice with which the Thames
was covered, having been stopped by London Bridge, now assumed the
shape of a solid surface over that part of the river which entered from
Blackfriars Bridge to some distance below Three Crane Stairs, at the
bottom of Queen-street, Cheapside. The watermen, taking advantage of the
circumstance, placed notices at the end of all the streets leading to the
city side of the river, announcing safe footway over the river, which, as
might be expected, attracted immense crowds to witness so novel a scene.
Many were induced to venture on the ice, and the example thus afforded
soon led thousands to perambulate the rugged plain, where a variety of
amusements were prepared for their entertainment.

Among the more curious of these was the ceremony of roasting a small
sheep, which was toasted, or rather burnt over a coal fire, placed in a
large iron pan. For a view of this extraordinary spectacle, sixpence was
demanded, and willingly paid. The delicate meat when done was sold at a
shilling a slice, and termed Lapland mutton.

Of booths there was a great number, which were ornamented with streamers,
flags, and signs, and in which there was a plentiful store of those
favourite luxuries, gin, beer and gingerbread.

Opposite Three Crane Stairs there was a complete and well-frequented
thoroughfare to Bankside, which was strewed with ashes, and apparently
afforded a very safe, although a very rough path.

Near Blackfriars Bridge, however, the path did not appear to be equally
safe, for one young man, a plumber, named Davis, having imprudently
ventured to cross with some lead in his hands, he sank between two masses
of ice, to rise no more. Two young women nearly shared a similar fate,
but were happily rescued from their perilous situation by the prompt
efforts of a waterman. Many a fair nymph, indeed, was embraced in the
very arms of old Father Thames; three prim young quakeresses had a sort
of semi-bathing near London Bridge, and when landed on _terra firma_,
made the best of their way through the Borough, amid the shouts of an
admiring populace, to their residence at Newington. In consequence of the
impediments to the current of the river at London Bridge, the tide did
not ebb for some days more than one half the usual mark.

Wednesday, February 2nd: The Thames presented a complete Frost Fair.
The grand mall or walk was from Blackfriars Bridge; this was named the
City-road, and lined on each side with tradesmen of all descriptions.
Eight or ten printing presses were erected, and numerous pieces
commemorative of the great frost were actually printed on the ice.
Some of these frosty typographers displayed considerable taste in the
specimens.

At one press an orange-coloured standard was hoisted, with the watch word
“Orange Boven” in large characters, and the following papers were issued
from it:--

    FROST FAIR.

    “Amidst the arts which on the Thames appear,
    To Tell the wonders of this icy year,
    Printing claims a prior place, which at one view
    Erects a monument of That and You.”

Another:--

    “You that walk here, and do design to tell
    Your children’s children what this year befell,
    Come, buy this print, and it will then be seen
    That such a year as this has seldom been.”

Another of these stainers of paper addressed the spectators in the
following terms:--

“Friends, now is your time to support the freedom of the press. Can the
press have greater liberty? Here you find it working in the middle of
the Thames; and if you encourage us by buying our impressions, we will
keep it going in the true spirit of liberty during the frost.”

One of the articles printed and sold contained the following lines:--

    “Behold the river Thames is frozen o’er,
    Which lately ships of mighty burden bore;
    Now different arts and pastimes here you see,
    But printing claims the superiority.”

Besides the above the Lord’s Prayer and several other pieces were issued
from these ice bated printing offices, and were bought with the greatest
avidity.

Thursday, February 3rd: The adventurers were still more numerous. Swings,
book-stalls, dancing in a barge, suttling-booths, playing at skittles,
and almost every appendage of a fair on land was now transferred to the
Thames. Thousands of people flocked to behold this singular spectacle,
and to partake of the various sports and pastimes. The ice now became
like a solid rock of adamant, and presented a truly picturesque
appearance. The view of St. Paul’s and of the city with its white
foreground had a very singular effect; in many parts mountains of ice
were upheaved, and these fragments bore a strong resemblance to the rude
interior of a stone quarry.

Friday, February, 4th: Every day brought a fresh accession of “pedlars
to sell their wares,” and the greatest rubbish of all sorts was raked up
and sold at double and treble the original cost. Books and toys labelled
“bought on the Thames” were seen in profusion. The waterman profited
exceedingly, for each person paid a toll of 2d. or 3d. before he was
admitted to the Frost Fair. Some _douceur_ also was expected on your
return. These men were said to have taken £6 each in the course of a day.

This afternoon, about five o’clock three persons, an old man and two
lads, having ventured on a piece of ice above London Bridge, it suddenly
detached itself from the main body, and was carried by the tide through
one of the arches. The persons on the ice, who laid themselves down for
safety, were observed by the boatmen at Billingsgate, who with laudable
activity, put off to their assistance, and rescued them from their danger.

One of them was able to walk, but the other two were carried in a state
of insensibility to a public-house in the neighbourhood, where they
received every attention their situation required.

Many persons were seen on the ice till late at night, and the effect by
moonlight was singularly picturesque and beautiful. With a little stretch
of imagination, we might have transported ourselves to the frozen climes
of the north--to Lapland, Sweden or Holland.

Saturday, February 5th: The morning of this day augured rather
unfavourably for the continuance of Frost Fair. The wind had shifted
to the south, and a light fall of snow took place. The visitors of the
Thames, however, were not to be deterred by trifles. Thousands again
returned, and there was much life and bustle on the frozen element.

The footpath in the centre of the river was hard and secure, and among
the pedestrians we observed four donkeys which trotted at a nimble pace
and produced considerable merriment. At every glance, the spectator
met with some pleasing novelty. Gaming in all its branches threw out
different allurements, while honesty was out of the question. Many of
the itinerant admirers of the profit gained by E. O. Tables, wheel of
fortune, the garter, &c., were industrious in their avocations, leaving
their kind customers without a penny to pay their passage over a plank
to the shore. Skittles was played by several parties, and the drinking
tents filled by females and their companions, dancing reels to the sound
of fiddles, while others sat round large fires, drinking rum, grog, and
other spirits. Tea, coffee, and eatables were provided in ample order,
while passengers were invited to eat by way of recording their visit.
Several respectable tradesmen also attended with their wares, selling
books, toys, and trinkets of every description.

Towards evening the concourse became thinned; rain fell in some quantity;
Maister Ice gave some loud cracks, and floated with the printing presses,
booths, &c., to the no small dismay of publicans, typographers, &c. In
short, this icy palace of Momus, this fairy frost work, was soon to be
dissolved, and doomed to vanish like the baseless fabric of a vision, but
leaving some “wrecks behind.”

A short time before the thaw, a gentleman standing by one of the printing
presses, and supposed to be a limb of the law, handed the following
_jeu d’esprit_ to its conductor, requesting that it might be printed
on the Thames. The prophecy which it contains has been most remarkably
fulfilled:--

    “To Madam Tabitha Thaw.

    Dear dissolving dame,--

    Father Frost and Sister Snow have boneyed my borders, formed an
    idol of ice upon my bosom, and all the Lords of London came to
    make merry: now, as you love mischief, treat the multitude with a
    few cracks by a sudden visit, and obtain the prayers of the poor
    upon both banks. Given at my press the 5th February, 1814. Thomas
    Thames.”

It was evident that a thaw was rapidly taking place, yet such was the
indiscretion and heedlessness of some persons that one fatal accident
occurred.

Two genteel looking young men fell victims to their temerity in venturing
on the ice above Westminster Bridge, notwithstanding the warnings of the
waterman. A large mass on which they stood, and which had been loosened
by the flood-tide, gave way, and they floated down the stream. As they
passed under Westminster Bridge they cried out most piteously for help.
They had not gone far before they sat down, but, going too near the
edge, they overbalanced the mass, and were precipitated into the stream,
sinking not to appear again.

This morning, also, Mr. Lawrence, of the Feathers, in High Timber street,
Queenhithe, erected a booth on the Thames opposite Brook’s Wharf, for the
accommodation of the curious. At nine at night he left it to the care of
two men, taking away all liquors, except some gin, which he gave them for
their own use.

Sunday, February 6th: At two o’clock this morning, the tide began to
flow with great rapidity at London Bridge; the thaw assisted the efforts
of the tide, and the booth just mentioned was hurried along with the
quickness of lightning towards Blackfriars Bridge. There were nine men
in it, and in their alarm they neglected the fire and candles, which,
communicating with the covering, set it in a flame. The men succeeded in
getting into a lighter which had broken from its moorings, but it was
dashed to pieces against one of the piers of Blackfriars Bridge, on which
seven of them got, and were taken off safely; the other two got into a
barge while passing Puddle Dock.

On this day, the Thames towards high tide (about 3 p.m.) presented a very
tolerable idea of the frozen ocean; grand masses of ice floating along,
added to the great height of the water and afforded a striking sight for
contemplation.

Thousands of disappointed persons thronged the banks; and many a
’prentice boy and servant maid sighed unutterable things at the sudden
and unlooked-for destruction of Frost Fair.

Monday, February, 7th: Large masses of ice are yet floating, and numerous
lighters, broken from their moorings, are seen in different parts of the
river, many of them complete wrecks. The damage done to the craft and
barges is supposed to be very great. From London Bridge to Westminster,
twenty thousand pounds will scarcely make good the losses that have been
sustained.

An interesting account of an “Ice Festival” is given in the pages of
_The Champion_ of February 6th, 1814. It is chronicled that “Saturday
se’nnight afforded to the inhabitants of Kelso a scene to which there
has been nothing similar for the last 73 years. The late severe weather
having frozen the Tweed completely over, a number of the respectable
inhabitants were desirous of dining on the ice, and gave orders to Mr.
Lander, of the Queen’s Head Inn, to provide what was necessary for the
occasion. He accordingly erected an enormous tent in the midst of the
river, opposite Ednam House, and served up an excellent and hot dinner to
a numerous and respectable company. The tent, which was well heated by
stoves, was surmounted by an orange flag, and the union flags of England
and Holland were displayed on tables. From forty to fifty sat down to
dinner. The following toasts were drunk with glee:--‘General Frost, who
so signally fought last winter for the deliverance of Europe, and who now
supports the present company.’ ‘Both sides of the Tweed, and God preserve
us in the middle.’ The company were much gratified by seeing among them
an old inhabitant of the town who was present at the last entertainment
given under similar circumstances, in the winter of the year 1740, when
part of an ox was roasted on the ice. No accident happened to disturb the
pleasures of the scene.”

From a scene of rejoicing let us turn to a record of a painful death
occurring at this period. We find in the “Annals of Manchester,”
edited by W. E. A. Axon, (pub. 1886) a note as follows, under the year
1814:--“Miss Lavinia Robinson was found drowned in the Irwell, near the
Mode Wheel, February 8. This young lady, who possessed superior mental
accomplishments, as well as personal beauty, was engaged to Mr. Holroyd,
a surgeon, but on the eve of her intended marriage she disappeared from
her home in Bridge Street, December 6th, and owing to the long frost, her
body remained under the ice for a long period. It appears most probable
that the rash act of the ‘Manchester Ophelia’ was due to a quarrel in
which her betrothed had repeated some slanderous statements respecting
her. There was, however, a strong suspicion that she had met with foul
play. The slanders were shown to be baseless, and the feeling against Mr.
Holroyd was so strong that he had to leave the town. (Procter’s ‘Bygone
Manchester,’ pages 268, 269. ‘City News Notes and Queries,’ vol. I., p.
265.)”

We extract from the _Newcastle Weekly Chronicle_ the following lines by
an anonymous author:--

TYNE FAIR; OR, THE GREAT FROST, JAN. 31, AND FEB. 1, 1814.

The frost here commemorated began about the 8th December, 1813, and
continued in a gentle manner until the morning of the 14th January, 1814,
when a stronger frost covered the Tyne below bridge with a smooth and
perfect sheet of ice, on which, the succeeding day, a number of people
ventured, and skaters, for three successive days. A partial thaw came
on which damped the ardour of skaters, until the night of the 29th of
January, when again a severe frost considerably strengthened the ice, and
presented a glassy surface above bridge. On Monday, 31st January, no less
than seven tents were erected on it for the sale of spirits, and fires
kindled on that and the succeeding day. Parties dined in various of the
tents. The desire of recreation shone forth in every face. Horse shoes,
football, “toss or buy,” rolly polly, fiddlers, pipers, razor grinders,
recruiting parties, and racers with and without skates, were all alive
to the moment. Hats, breeches, shifts, stockings, ribbons, and even
legs of mutton, were the rewards of the racers, who turned night into
day; the brilliancy of the full moon contributing to their diversions
until late beyond midnight. A horse and sledge above bridge added to the
novelty of the scene; and it is worthy of remark that not one accident
of consequence happened, although thousands ventured their persons upon
the ice. Owing to the severity of the season, the London Mail for Friday,
the 21st January, and three following days, was brought to Newcastle
on the fifth day, in the Lord Wellington Coach, with eight horses; a
circumstance quite new to the inhabitants of canny Newcastle.

    The angry winter storms aloud,
      In icy chains the floods are bound;
    And on the Tyne the people crowd,
      As if it were on level ground.

    The keelmen now lay many a plank,
      To make safe footing on the Tyne;
    And old and young of every rank
      Pay them a toll to pace the Tyne.

    There’s next erected many a tent,
      And blazing fires the fancy charm;
    Where the shivering lookers-on soon went,
      And dine and drink to keep them warm.

    From Red Heugh down to Ouse Burn Quay,
      The river’s crowded like a fair;
    And many a group of people play
      At horse shoes for a quart of beer.

    Two asses on the ice were brought--
      A smock displayed, for which a race
    Upon the Tyne, who would have thought
      To see such sport in such a place?

    There’s “Bambro’ Jack,” and “Mutton Pies,”
      With plump-fac’d Nell and hot black puddings,
    “Come taste them, hinny,” oft she cries,
      “Believe me, lad, they’re very goodens.”

    There’s Jack the razor-grinder too,
      Rolling his wheel o’er icy Tyne;
    Tho’ he’s as “drunk as Davey’s sow,”
      Yet he obtains some skates to grind.

    Here Jim the fiddler screw’d his pegs,
      While stripling wenches round him dance;
    And bold recruits a party begs
      To gather laurels e’en in France.

    In Jemmy Nelson’s tent we see,
      A toping party do combine,
    To pass the afternoon with glee,
      And drown their cares in rosy wine.

    Now turn your eyes west of the bridge,
      And you will view a sight that’s rare,
    A horse there draws a Northern sledge,
      Like unto Neptune’s stately car.

    Peg Swinney, she to seek her mate,
      Made her first passage o’er a ship,
    But on the plank she slipp’d her feet,
      Fell on the ice and lamed her hip.

    A barber, bred in Thespis’ school,
      With a new pair of skates well shod,
    Display’d his anticks like a fool,
      And through the arch he took his road.

    But here the faithless ice soon broke,
      Up to the shoulders sous’d was he,
    Where he remain’d till with a rope,
      Some sailors dragg’d him to the quay.

    A gentle thaw took place at last,
      The keels are all afloat we see;
    And dingy Tyne, late bound so fast,
      Now rolls its current to the sea.

[Sidenote: 1814]

The winter very severe in Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1838]

On the 7th January a very severe frost set in and continued a month. This
frost was predicted in “Murphy’s Almanack,” and the fulfilment of the
prediction rendered the publication extremely popular. A rhyme of the
period was as follows--

    Murphy hath a weather eye,
    He can tell whatever he pleases,
    Whether it will be wet or dry,
    When it thaws and when it freezes.

It is recorded in January this year, that the thermometer at Walton, near
Claremont, fell to 14 deg. below zero; at Beckenham it was 13½ deg. below
zero; at Wallingford, 5 deg. below zero; at Greenwich, 4 deg. below zero;
and at Glasgow 1 deg. below zero.

The principal rivers of this country were frozen over. This winter is
frequently called “Murphy’s winter.”

[Sidenote: 1855]

On January 16th a very strong frost commenced, and prevailed for about
six weeks. Rivers were frozen over, and inland navigation was entirely
suspended. The working classes were subject to many privations on account
of the dearness of food and depression of trade. In London 10,000 dock
porters were out of work, and such was their sufferings that bread-riots
occurred in the east end of the town. During this frost traffic was
established on the Ure in Lincolnshire to the distance of thirty-five
miles.

[Sidenote: 1860-61]

Very severe frost from 20th December to 5th January. Says the _Northern
Daily Telegraph_, in a recent article on “Old Fashioned Winters” “on the
25th of December, 1860, the thermometer in London fell to 15 degrees
Fahrenheit, which is 17 degrees below freezing point. In the country the
same intensity of cold was felt, and a certain meteorologist wrote to
the _Times_ stating that at Boston, in Nottinghamshire, the temperature
four feet above the ground was 8 degrees below zero, whilst on the grass
it was 13 degrees, or 45 degrees of frost. Fortunately this extreme
cold only lasted three days, and the inconveniences attending it--in
themselves bad enough--were not to be compared with the miseries which
accompanied the great Frost Fair.”

[Sidenote: 1879-1880]

In the middle of January, 1880, it was expected by many that a Frost
Fair would once more be held on the Thames. The last two months of 1879
and the opening month of 1880 were extremely cold. The President of the
Meteorological Society in his report, 1880, says, “The period through
which we have been passing since October, 1878, has been one of great
cold, in many respects without precedent during nearly a quarter of a
century. The harvest of 1879 is recorded as the worst ever known. Shrubs,
even hollies, little short of 100 years old were killed. Birds were
destroyed, Robin Redbreasts took shelter in our houses; all the rivers
in England were frozen over. It is stated that Major Slack of the 63rd
Regiment, at Oakamoor Station, railway lamps were frozen out, and that
rabbits pushed for food had attacked the oil and grease on the station
crane.” At Chirmside Bridge a temperature of 6° below zero was observed.
Peach trees 60 years old were killed to the roots. The evergreens,
laurels, rhododendrons, hollies in many instances, Wellingtonias, and
many others were all killed, and many people frozen to death. This frost
began on the 22nd November, 1879, and on the 2nd February, 1880, a thaw
began.

[Sidenote: 1881]

Severe frost from the 7th to the 27th January. Snow fell daily from the
9th to the 27th of the month.

[Sidenote: 1886-7]

The concluding pages of this work are being written and printed during a
hard frost. The closing days of the past year, and the early days of the
current year will long be remembered amongst severe winters.

Perhaps we cannot more fitly close our account of “Famous Frosts and
Frost Fairs,” than by quoting the following lines from the facile pen
of Edith May, culled from the pages of Hale’s “Selections of Female
Writers,” published in 1853.

    FROST PICTURES.

    When like a sullen exile driven forth,
    Southward, December drags his icy chain,
    He graves fair pictures of his native North
            On the crisp window-pane.

    So some pale captive blurs, with lips unshorn,
    The latticed glass, and shapes rude outlines there,
    With listless finger and a look forlorn,
            Cheating his dull despair.

    The fairy fragments of some Arctic scene
    I see to-night; blank wastes of polar snow,
    Ice-laden boughs, and feathery pines that lean
            Over ravines below.

    Black frozen lakes, and icy peaks blown bare,
    Break the white surface of the crusted pane,
    And spear-like leaves, long ferns, and blossoms fair
            Linked in silvery chain.

    Draw me, I pray thee, by this slender thread;
    Fancy, thou sorceress, bending vision-wrought
    O’er that dim well perpetually fed
            By the clear springs of thought!

    Northward I turn, and tread those dreary strands,--
    Lakes where the wild fowl breed, the swan abides;
    Shores where the white fox, burrowing in the sands,
            Harks to the droning tides.

    And seas, where, drifting on a raft of ice,
    The she bear rears her young; and cliffs so high,
    The dark-winged birds that emulate their rise
            Melt through the pale blue sky.

    There, all night long, with far diverging rays,
    And stalking shades, the red Auroras glow;
    From the keen heaven, meek suns with pallid blaze
            Light up the Arctic snow.

    Guide me, I pray, along those waves remote,
    That deep unstartled from its primal rest;
    Some errant sail, the fisher’s lone light boat
            Borne waif-like on its breast!

    Lead me, I pray, where never shallop’s keel
    Brake the dull ripples throbbing to their caves:
    Where the mailed glacier with his armed heel
            Spurs the resisting waves!

    Paint me, I pray, the phantom hosts that hold
    Celestial tourneys when the midnight calls;
    On airy steeds, with lances bright and bold,
            Storming her ancient halls.

    Yet, while I look, the magic picture fades;
    Melts the bright tracery from the frosted pane;
    Trees, vales, and cliffs, in sparkling snows arrayed,
            Dissolve in silvery rain.

    Without, the day’s pale glories sink and swell
    Over the black rise of yon wooded height;
    The moon’s thin crescent, like a stranded shell,
            Left on the shores of night.

    Hark how the north wind, with a hasty hand,
    Rattling my casement, frames his mystic rhyme.
    House thee, rude minstrel, chanting through the land,
            Runes of the olden times.




INDEX.


  Ale, Hot, used for mixing mortar, 9.

  Anne, Princess, visits the Frost Fair, 19, 20.

  Armitage, John, High Sheriff of Yorkshire, 12.

  Artichokes, growth of, in London in 1608, 11.

  Ashmolean Museum, Oxford, a Broadside in, 32.

  Axon’s, W. E. A., _Annals of Manchester_, quoted, 74.


  Bailey, Wm., printer on the Thames, 58.

  Bampton, Devonshire, Icy Epitaph at, 53.

  Barley, Price of, in 1614, 12.

  Bartholomew Fair, 33, 56.

  Bath, Severe Frost at, in 1754, 51.

  Beale, Dr., on the frost of 1672, 17.

  Beans, price of, in 1614, 12.

  Bear-Baiting on the Ice, 55.

  Beckenham, 79.

  Bess of Hardwick, Death of, 9.

  Birch, W., Enamel-painter and Engraver, 58.

  Birmingham Mails delayed through a dense Fog, 61.

  _Blanket Fair, A True description of, upon the River Thames, 1683. A
    broadside_, 22-26.

  Bodleian Library, Oxford, _Cold Doings in London_, a tract in, 11.

  _Book of Liberty_, read in Churches, 13.

  Boston, Notts., Severe Frost at, 80.

  Bowles, John, Printseller at “The Black Horse,” 44.

  Bowyer, William, Printer, 43.

  Brugis, H., Printer, 26.


  Catherine, Queen, Infanta of Portugal, 19.

  _Champion, The_, on the Ice Festival of 1814, 73.

  Charles II., Visit to the Frost Fair on the Thames in 1683-84, 19.

  Chatsworth, 9.

  Chirmside Bridge. Temperature at, 81.

  _Cold Doings in London_, quoted, 11.

  “Cold Yeare, The” quoted, 13.

  Cornwall, slight frost of 1763, 52.

  Corsellis, F., Oxford’s first Printer, 48.

  Croker, J. Wilson, 61.

  Croom, G., Printing done on the Thames by, 19, 20.

  Cross, John, 45.

  Crowle’s _Illustrated Pennant_, quoted, 58.


  Dalton, C. and R., Bell-founders, York, 54.

  Davis, Mr., Drowning of, 65.

  Derbyshire, Chatsworth, 9;
    Hardwick, 8, 9.

  Dawks’s _News-Letter_, on the frost of 1715-16, 41, 42.

  D’Este, Mary, 19.

  Doll, the pippin Woman, death of, 49,
    Gay’s verse on, _ibid._

  Drake’s _Eboracum_, quoted, 10, 12.

  “Drunk as Davey’s Sow,” a phrase, 77.


  Ecclesfield Parish Register, extract from, on mixing Mortar with
    Malt-Liquor, 9.

  Ednam House, Kelso, 73.

  Eggs used for pointing Churches, 9.

  Elizabeth, Queen, 8.

  England, 73,
    Introduction of Printing into, by Henry VI., 48;
    Rivers Frozen, 80;
    Severe frost in 359, 1.

  _English Chronicle, The, or Frosty Calendar_, a broadside, 1739-40, 46.

  E. O. Tables, gambling by, practised, 69.

  Epitaph, Icy, at Bampton, Devonshire, 53.

  _Erra Pater’s Prophesy, or Frost Fair in 1683_, quoted, 39.

  Evelyn, John, on the Frost of 1648-49, 14;
    frost of 1683-84, 17, 20.


  Faust, J., Inventor of Printing, 48.

  Foss, River, 12.

  Foster, Geo., Printseller, St. Paul’s Church-yard, 46.

  _Frost Fair, An Extract Draught of, on the River Thames_, 46.

  _Frost Fair on the River Thames_, 1715-16, 43-44.

  _Frost in the Year 1739-40_, quoted, 45.

  Frost Pictures, a Poem, by Edith May, 82-83.

  _Frostiana_, Curious effect of the cold on birds in the Frost of 1806
    mentioned in, 60.


  Gainsborough, 13.

  Gent, Thos., His Printing shop on the river Ouse, at York, in 1719,
    49-50.

  _Gentleman’s Magazine_ on the Frost of 1742, 51,
    on the Frost of 1763, _ibid._,
    of 1782, 53, 54,
    of 1784, 55,
    and of 1789, 55.

  George, Prince, of Denmark, 20.

  Glasgow, 79.

  Gottenburgh, John, Printer, 48.

  Gough, Richard. 11.

  Gravesend, 7.

  _Great Britain’s Wonder: or London’s Admiration_, A Broadside, 26.

  Greenwich, 79.

  _Grey Friars, Chronicles of the_, quoted, 7.


  Hale’s _Selections of Female Writers_, quoted 81.

  Haly, M., Printer, 32.

  Harford Bridge, 61.

  _Harleian Miscellany_, quoted, 3.

  Harley Thos., Lord Mayor of London, 52.

  Hatfield House, 61.

  Hawarden, Lord, Accident to, 61.

  Hay, price of, in 1614, 12.

  Heaton, John, Printer, 40.

  Henry II. 5.

  ⸺ III. 5.

  ⸺ VI. and the Introduction of Printing into England, 48.

  Hodgeson, Mr., 48.

  Holinshed’s “_Chronicle_,” quoted, 8.

  Holland, 69, 73.

  Holroyd, Mr., 74, 75.

  Horse Shoe, Game of, 77.

  Howe’s “_Stow’s English Chronicle_,” quoted, 6, 10.

  Hulse, Sir Henry, Knt, 39.


  _Ice Fair_, quoted, 45.

  Icy Epitaph, 53.

  Ireland, 73;
    slight frost of 1763, 52.

  Irwell River, Drowning of Miss Robinson in, 74.


  Jackson’s _Pictorial Press_, quoted, 32.


  Kelso, Ice Festival at, 73;
    Ednam House, 73;
    Queen’s Head Inn, 73.

  Kentish Town, 61.


  Lambeth, 6, 7, 8, 18.

  Lander, Mr. Publican, Public dinner served on the river Tweed by,
    during the frost of 1814, 73.

  Lapland, 69;
    Lapland Mutton, 64.

  Lawrence, Mr., Publican, erected a booth on the Thames, 71.

  Leeds, 13.

  Leybourne, Birds fettered with Ice at, 60.

  Lintott, Bernard, Bookseller, 43.

  London, 22, 32, 38, 44, 79, 80;
    Blackfriars Bridge, 63-66, 72;
    British Museum, Royal Coll. of Prints and Drawings in the, 22;
    Brooks Wharf, 71;
    Carlton House, 35;
    Cheapside, 35, 64;
    Dock Labourers thrown out of work, 79;
    Fire in 1086, 3;
    Fleet Street, Shop signs in, 21, 40;
    Fog, Dense, in 1813-14, 61;
    Green Arbour, 26;
    Guildhall Library, 22;
    High Timber Street, 71;
    Hungerford Stairs, 48;
    Little Old Bailey, 26.
    London Bridge, 21, 40, 43, 63, 65, 68, 73;
      Arches carried away during the frost of 1281-2, 6, 7, 8;
      Houses on, damaged, in the frost of 1739, 40;
      View of, 11.
    Ludgate, 32;
    Moorfields, 35;
    Newington, 65;
    Puddle Dock, 72;
    Royal Exchange, 32;
    Queenhithe, 45, 63, 71;
    Queen Street, 64;
    Rose Chair, 59;
    Rotherhithe, Fall of a house at, 56;
    St. James’s Street, 43;
    St. Paul’s Cathedral, 46, 67;
      Burning of in 1086, 3;
    Smithfield, 48;
    Southwark, 22, 23, 26, 27, 46;
    Strand, 43, 48;
    Temple Bar, 40;
    Temple Stairs, 21, 23, 26, 27.
    Thames Frozen, 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22,
      23, 24, 26, 27, 28, 34, 38, 40, 44, 46, 47, 67, 72, 80;
        from London to Gravesend, in 54, 55, 59.
      Blanket Fair upon, a Broadside, 22-26.
      Bull-Baiting on, 24.
      Coaches plying from Westminster to the Temple, 18, 23, 35, 41.
      Fair in 1564-6, 8;
        in 1608, 10;
        in 1620, 13, 55, 66;
        in reign of Charles II, 15, 17, 55, 56;
        _Frost Fair_, 46, 66.
      _Mapp or Representation of Boothes_ &c. 1683, 20.
      Men walking over, from Westminster to Lambeth, in 1281-2, 6, 7;
      Navigation on, suspended, 52, 54;
      Printing done upon, 41, 46, 47, 58, 66, 67;
      Subscriptions raised for the sufferers through the frost of 1789, 57.
    Three Crane Stairs, 64, 65;
    Westminster, 18, 40, 41, 73;
    Westminster Bridge, 71;
    Whitehall, 19, 40, 41;
    Whitehall Stairs, 46;
    Whitefriars, 41.

  _London Chronicle_, on the frost of 1789, 58, 59.

  Loughborough, Leicestershire, waggon load of Coals, drawn on the ice
    from, to Carlton House, London, 55.


  Maidenhead Coach, overturned, 61.

  Maitland’s _Hist. of London_, quoted, 13.

  Malling, 60.

  Manchester, Bridge Street, 74;
    _City News Notes and Queries_, on the Drowning of Miss Robinson, 75.

  Martaine, Thos., 36.

  May’s, Edith, Frost Pictures, a poem, 82-83.

  Milbank, Horse Ferry at, 18.

  Mode Wheel, near River Irwell, 74.

  Modena, Francis, Duke of, 19.

  Moxon’s _Map of the River Thames_, 1683-4, referred to, 38, 39.

  Murphy’s _Almanack_, Frost of 1838 predicted in, 78, 79.


  Nelson, Jemmy, 77.

  Neva, River, Ice Palace erected upon, in 1740, 50-51.

  Newcastle, 75, 76;
    Antiquarian Society Transactions, on the Frost of 1795-96, 59;
    Ouse Burn Quay 77;
    Red Heugh, 77;
    The Tyne Fair, at, 75, 76.

  _Newcastle Weekly Chronicle_, on the Frost Fair of 1814, 75.

  Newman, W., Miller, of Leybourne, 60.

  Norris, Jas., Bookseller, at the King’s Arms, Fleet St., 40.

  _Northern Daily Telegraph_ on “Old Fashioned Winters” 79.

  _Nottingham Guardian_, quoted, 13.

  _Notes and Queries_, quoted, 13.


  Oakamoor Station, 81.

  “Odd Showers” referred to, 17.

  “Old Chronicle,” quoted, 4.

  Oxford, Printing first Practised at, 48.

  Ouse Bridges, borne away with the Ice, in 1564, 8.


  Penkethman, quoted, 5.

  Pepys, Samuel, on the frosts of 1663, 1664-65, 14.

  Plymouth, intense frost at, in 1782, 53.

  Printing, Invention of, 47.

  Proctors’ _Bygone Manchester_, on the Drowning of Miss Robinson, 75.

  Prynne’s _Divine Tragedie lately acted_, quoted, 13.

  _Public Advertiser_, quoted 57.

  Putney-Bridge, 56.


  Redriff, 55, 56.

  Regent, Prince, his intended visit to the Marquis of Salisbury, 61

  Robinson, Miss L., Drowning of, in the Irwell, 74, 75.

  Rochester Bridge, destroyed by the frost of 1281-2, 6.

  Russia, Anne, Empress of, causes an ice Palace to be erected on the
    Neva, 50.

  Salisbury Marquis of, 61.

  Samuel, G., Painter, 58.

  Scotland, Fourteen weeks’ Frost in 359, 1.

  Seller, John, Bookseller, 32.

  Shad, J. 32.

  Short’s quoted 2, 3, 5.

  Signs, Shop, Black Horse, Cornhill, 44;
    Feathers, High Timber St. 71;
    Globe, St. Paul’s Churchyard, 32;
    King’s Arms, Fleet Street 40;
    Mitre Tavern, Fleet Street, 21;
    Queen’s Head Inn, Kelso, 73;
    Talbot, Fleet Street, 21.

  Slack, Major, 80.

  Southampton Beauvois Hill, 37;
    Berry, _ib._;
    Bittern Farme, _ib._;
    Calshott Castle, 36;
    Extract from Holy-Rood Church Register on the Frost of 1683-4, _ib._;
    Ichen Ferry, 37;
    Marchwood, _ib._;
    Millbrook point, _ib._;
    Redbridge, _ib._

  Stows’ _Annals_, quoted, 8;
    _Chronicle_, quoted, 4, 6, 7.

  Sweden, 69.

  Swinney, Peg, 78.


  Thamasis’s _Advice to a Painter_, quoted 20.

  _Thames, A View of the, from Rotherhithe Stairs during the frost in
    1789_, 58.

  Timbs’s _Curiosities of London_, quoted, 40;
    on the Frost of 1739-40, 48;
    on the Frost of 1811, 60.

  _Times, The_, on the Frost at Boston, Notts., 80.

  Trent, River, Playing Foot-ball on, in 1634, 13.

  Tweed, River, Dinner given upon, in 1814, 73, 74.

  Tyne, River, 75-77;
    Frost Fair of 1814, 75;
    a Ballad on the Fair, 76-78.


  Ubley, Frost of 1683, Extract from Parochial Register on, 37.

  Ure, River, Frozen in 1855, 79.

  Uxbridge, 61.


  _View of the Booths, and all the Variety of Shows &c._, 44.


  Wales, slight frost of, 1763, 52.

  Wales, Prince of, Visits the Frost Fair of 1715-16, 42.

  Walford, C., _Insurance Cyclopædia_, quoted, 3.

  ⸺ Edward, M. A., _Old and New London_, quoted, 13.

  Wallingford, 79.

  Walton, Near Claremont, 79.

  Waltor, Robt., Bookseller at the Globe, 32.

  Warter, Wm. Stationer, at the “Talbott,” 21.

  Wellington, Coach, Lord, from London to Newcastle, 76.

  Weltjie, Mr., Clerk of the Cellars to the Prince of Wales, 55.

  White’s _Natural Hist. of Selborne_, on the Frost of 1768, 52-53.

  William the Conqueror, 3.

  _Winter Wonder, A, or the Thames Frozen over with Remarks on the
    Resort there, a broadside_, 32.

  _Wonderfull Fair, A, or a Fair of Wonders_, 1684, quoted, 39.

  _Wonders of the Deep_, a Broadside, 34-36.

  Wrington, 37.


  York, 12;
    Flood of 1614, 12;
    Horse Race run upon the Ouse at, 10;
    Printing done upon the Ouse at, 49;
    Walmgate, 12.

  York, James, Duke of, 19.

  Yorkshire, Ecclesfield Parish Register, Extract from, 9;
    River Ouse Frozen in 1607, 10;
      again 1614, 12;
    Overflow of, 12;
    Ouse Bridge borne away in 1564-65, 8;
    Tadcaster Church Bells moulded during the frost of 1783, 54.

[Illustration]

CHARLES H. BARNWELL, PRINTER, BOND STREET, HULL.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAMOUS FROSTS AND FROST FAIRS IN GREAT BRITAIN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


