The Project Gutenberg eBook of General Wauchope
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: General Wauchope

Author: F.S.A. Scot. William Baird


        
Release date: June 11, 2021 [eBook #65570]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/65570

Credits: Al Haines


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENERAL WAUCHOPE ***

[Frontispiece: Major-General WAUCHOPE, C.B., C.M.G., LL.D.  _From a
Photograph by Horsburgh, Edinburgh._]




  GENERAL WAUCHOPE


  BY

  WILLIAM BAIRD, F.S.A. SCOT.

  AUTHOR OF
  'JOHN THOMSON OF DUDDINGSTON, PASTOR AND PAINTER'
  'ANNALS OF DUDDINGSTON AND PORTOBELLO'
  'SIXTY YEARS OF CHURCH LIFE IN AYRE'
  ETC.



  EDINBURGH AND LONDON
  OLIPHANT ANDERSON AND FERRIER
  1900





  TO THE
  OFFICERS AND MEN OF THE HIGHLAND BRIGADE
  WHO BRAVELY FOUGHT AT MAGERSFONTEIN
  THIS MEMOIR OF THEIR LEADER
  IS INSCRIBED




CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION

CHAP.

I. THE WAUCHOPES OF NIDDRIE MARISCHAL

II. CHILDHOOD--EARLY TENDENCIES--THE 'HOUSEHOLD
TROOP'--EDUCATION--NAVAL TRAINING--THE 'BRITANNIA'--THE 'ST.
GEORGE'--PRINCE ALFRED

III. ENTERS THE ARMY--THE BLACK WATCH--ASHANTI WAR--RETURN
HOME--BANQUET AT PORTOBELLO

IV. DEATH OF WAUCHOPE's FATHER--ORDERED TO
MALTA--REMINISCENCES--RELIGIOUS CONVICTIONS--CYPRUS--APPOINTMENT AS
CIVIL COMMISSIONER OF PAPHO--REMINISCENCES--SIR ROBERT BIDDULPH--THE
SULTAN'S CLAIMS

V. WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA--ARABI PASHA'S REBELLION IN
EGYPT--TEL-EL-KEBIR--MARRIAGE--LIFE IN CAIRO

VI. THE EASTERN SOUDAN--BATTLE OF EL-TEB--ATTEMPT TO RELIEVE GENERAL
GORDON--ASCENT OF THE NILE--THE WHALE-BOATS--BATTLE OF
KIRBEKAN--RETURN TO CAIRO--MALTA--GIBRALTAR

VII. THE MIDLOTHIAN CAMPAIGN

VIII. THE 73RD REGIMENT AT MARYHILL BARRACKS--INCIDENTS OF HOME
LIFE--MILITARY LIFE AT YORK--APPOINTMENT TO SOUDAN CAMPAIGN

IX. THE SOUDAN--BATTLES OF ATBARA AND OMDURMAN--ARRIVAL
HOME--RECEPTION AT NIDDRIE--DEGREE OF LL.D.--PAROCHIAL
DUTIES--PARLIAMENTARY CONTEST FOR SOUTH EDINBURGH

X. OUTBREAK OF HOSTILITIES IN SOUTH AFRICA--COMMAND OF THE HIGHLAND
BRIGADE--DEPARTURE FOR SOUTH AFRICA--THE SITUATION--BATTLE OF
MAGERSFONTEIN--DEATH--FUNERAL--AFTER THE BATTLE

XI. CHARACTERISTICS

INDEX




ILLUSTRATIONS

PORTRAIT . . . . Frontispiece

NIDDRIE MARISCHAL, FRONT VIEW

ANDREW WAUCHOPE, MIDSHIPMAN, AGE 14

ANDREW WAUCHOPE, AGE 30

NIDDRIE MARISCHAL, BACK VIEW

GENERAL WAUCHOPE ON HORSEBACK

THE GRAVE ON THE BATTLEFIELD

THE GRAVE AT MATJESFONTEIN




{9}

INTRODUCTION

On the 11th day of December 1899, amid the rattle of rifles, the
fierce booming of cannon, and the sharp bang of exploding shells, a
British force of Scottish Highlanders found themselves suddenly
confronted in the darkness of an early African morning by an unseen
enemy.  All night they had been on the march, tramping the bare rocky
veldt north of the Modder river, to attack, and if possible capture,
the fortified and strongly entrenched position held by the Boer army
of General Cronje among the rocks and cliffs of Magersfontein.  This
was full of difficulty and danger.  But the relief of the beleaguered
garrison of Kimberley was urgent, and if the work were to be done, it
demanded the best the British army could achieve.  Steadily and
determinedly stepped out the men of the Highland Brigade, commanded
by him they had long had reason to trust.  As lieutenant, as captain,
as colonel, they had followed him in many a well-fought battle, and
now with Major-General Wauchope leading them in the darkness, no
doubt or fear entered their breast.

But suddenly there was a flash of light from the rocks above,
followed immediately by a long belching flame of fire from a thousand
rifles in front.  They had unexpectedly {10} stumbled on the enemy.
There was no time for reorganisation, and in the midst of an
entanglement of trenches and barbed wire fencing, and exposed the
while to a withering fire against which nothing human could stand,
the Highland Brigade was mown down.  Here it was, but well in front
of his men, endeavouring to the last to cheer on his followers, one
of the most gallant and daring of modern British generals fought and
fell, a martyr for his Queen and country.

General Wauchope's tragic end was no unfitting conclusion to a life
of devoted, arduous service.  He died as he had lived, ever in the
midst of strife, an earnest, brave, and self-denying man, thinking
more of others than himself; graced with the dignity that comes from
inborn gentleness of spirit, and ever in his conduct exemplifying the
faith he professed.  No wonder that when such a man fell, there was a
wail of lamentation, not merely around his own home in Edinburgh
where he was best known and loved, but throughout the whole British
Empire.

The story of his life is one of incident and hairbreadth escapes, and
it deserves to rank high in the military annals of our country; for
among those who have helped to raise Great Britain to the honourable
position she holds among the nations of the world, as the vindicator
of freedom, as the protector of the weak against the strong, as the
pioneer of commerce, and the disseminator of Christianity, there are
few who have laboured more zealously or fought more bravely than he
whose career we shall in the following pages attempt to sketch.

{11}

In biography there is perhaps nothing more alluring than to trace out
traits in remote kindred, and to watch them coming forth with new
accompaniments in later generations, to work out, as it were, the
full story of the race, and probably to mark a climax in some chosen
individual.  Though we have not space to follow this out in the
present case, the distinguishing characteristics of General
Wauchope's ancestors may easily be discerned throughout his career;
to them he doubtless owed that simple manliness which looked upon
every man--whatever his station--as a brother; that unswerving
courage in time of danger, that unflinching devotion to duty, that
cheerfulness of disposition, which made him a general favourite; all
sobered by a sense of the unseen and eternal which entered into the
very heart of his life.

The author's efforts to gather the scattered material of so chequered
a career have been met on all hands by so willing a response from
those who could in any way claim the General's acquaintance, that his
task has been a pleasant and a comparatively easy one.  For
interesting details and incidents coming under their personal
observation, his best thanks are due to Admiral Lord Charles W. D.
Beresford, C.B.; General Sir Robert Biddulph, G.C.M.G., G.C.B.,
lately Governor of Gibraltar; Sir John C. M'Leod, G.C.B.; Colonel R.
K. Bayly, C.B.; Colonel Brickenden; Colonel Gordon J. C. Money; Major
A. G. Duff; Captain Christie, and other of his brother officers who
shared with him the dangers and toil of naval and military service,
in various parts of the world.

{12}

He cannot too gratefully acknowledge the kind assistance heartily
given by the Rev. George Wisely, D.D., Malta; the Rev. John
Mactaggart, Edinburgh; and the Rev. Alexander Stirling, York, army
chaplains.  Their contributions have been invaluable.

So fully indeed has material been placed at the author's disposal,
that the volume might have been easily extended beyond its present
limits.  But enough, it may be hoped, has been said in illustration
of General Wauchope's career as a soldier, and his character as a
man, to enable his fellow-countrymen to realise that in his lamented
death the nation has lost one of its bravest and best.




{13}

CHAPTER I

THE WAUCHOPES OF NIDDRIE MARISCHAL


Andrew Gilbert Wauchope came of a long line of ancestry, who have
distinguished themselves as soldiers, as churchmen, or in the more
commonplace capacity of country gentlemen.

The family history can be traced back for several centuries at least,
as occupying in the immediate vicinity of Edinburgh the estate of
Niddrie Marischal; and throughout the various troubles in which
Scottish history has been involved, the Lairds of Niddrie had their
fair share, forfeitures and restorations being an experience not
uncommon in their career.

Glancing over their genealogy, one might almost say with truth that
the Wauchopes have ever been a fighting race, holding opinions
strongly, and as strongly asserting them by word or deed when
occasion arose.

The very name of their estate has a smack of the military in it, if
it is true, as Celtic scholars say, that 'Niddrie' is derived from
the Gaelic _Niadh_ and _Ri_--signifying, in the British form of
Celtic, the king's champion.  Then the addition to the word, as
distinguishing it from several other Niddries in Scotland, of
Marischal, Marishal, or Merschell appears to have been given to the
{14} estate from the fact that the Wauchopes of Niddrie were in early
times hereditary bailies to Keith Lords Marischal, and later,
Marischal-Deputies in Midlothian, in the reign of James v.

Whether it be true, as stated by Mackenzie in his _Lives of Eminent
Scotsmen_, that the Wauchopes had their first rise in the reign of
Malcolm Caenmore, and that they came from France, we shall not stay
to discuss; but it is generally allowed that the name is a local
patronymic, common in the south of Scotland, and that the Wauchopes
of Niddrie Marischal belonged originally to Wauchopedale in
Roxburghshire, where they were for long vassals of the Earls of
Douglas.

The records of the earlier generations of the family having been
lost, one cannot with accuracy say who was its founder, or when he
lived.  In James the Second's reign, for making an inroad into
England, and again in Queen Mary's time, for espousing the cause of
that unfortunate sovereign, the estate of Niddrie was confiscated and
passed for a time into the hands of others, while the feu-charters
that remained were afterwards destroyed when the English under Oliver
Cromwell came to Scotland.  But notwithstanding these misfortunes,
there are documents extant which go to show that as far back as the
time of Robert III., who began to reign in 1390, there was one
Gilbert Wauchope holding the lands of Niddrie from that king, who is
supposed to be the grandson of _Thomas Wauchope in the county of
Edinburgh_, mentioned in the Ragman Rolls of 1296.

One scion of the family, born about the year 1500, in the reign of
James IV. attained to considerable distinction as an ecclesiastic.
This was Robert, the famous Archbishop of Armagh, a younger son of
Archibald, the Laird of Niddrie.  Defective in his vision almost to
blindness, he was, {15} notwithstanding this misfortune, possessed of
great natural abilities, and by diligent study attained to high and
varied accomplishments.  So proficient did he become in the study of
the Scriptures, the Fathers, and the Councils, that he was appointed
Doctor of Divinity in the University of Paris; and in 1535, having
attracted the notice of Pope Paul III., he was called to Rome, and
employed by him as legate to the Emperor of Germany and the King of
France, in both of which commissions he is said to have exhibited the
highest qualifications as an ambassador.  Some time after he was
promoted to be Archbishop of Armagh, in Ireland.  There he laboured
with incredible pains to enlighten the ignorant natives, travelling
about his diocese, and often preaching to them four or five times a
week.  Archbishop Wauchope found scope for his great talents at the
Council of Trent.  This famous council, called together by the Pope
to counteract the influence of the Reformation initiated by Luther in
Germany, met in March 1544, and continued its sittings till 1551.
The archbishop not only took a part in its proceedings, but wrote a
full account of them, a labour which, however, proved too much for
his strength, for he died at Paris on his way home on 9th November
1551.  He appears to have been held by his contemporaries in high
admiration.  Lesley says: 'Such was his judgment in secular affairs,
that few of his age came near him,' and in his capacity as legate 'he
acquitted himself so well that every one admired his wit, judgment,
and experience.'

Sir James Ware, speaking of him in a similar strain, and alluding,
like Lesley, to his having been born blind, says: 'He was sent legate
_a latere_ from the Pope to Germany, from whence came the German
proverb, "a blind legate to the sharp-sighted Germans."'

{16}

[Sidenote: Some ancestors]

Robert's elder brother, Gilbert Wauchope, was meanwhile Laird of
Niddrie, acquiring more property, extending his borders, and getting
himself involved in the local feuds peculiar to the time of James V.;
that king on one occasion, April 1535, having to grant a letter of
protection in favour of him 'and his wife and bairns' against Sir
Patrick Hepburn of Wauchtonne and thirty-four others for 'umbesetting
the highway for his slaughter.'  In this quarrel, even the Pope was
called upon to interfere in the interest of peace and safety.  In
1539 Paul III. put forth a mandate to the Dean of the Church of
Restalrig, stating that a beloved son, a noble man, Gilbert Wauchope,
lord in temporals of the place of Niddriffmarschall, within the
diocese of St. Andrews, had represented to the Pope that some sons of
iniquity, whom he was altogether ignorant of, had wickedly brought
many and heavy losses upon the said Gilbert Wauchope by concealing
the boundaries and limits or marches of the piece of land or place
called Quhitinche, feued to him by the Abbot and Convent of the
Monastery of the Holy Cross (Holyrood)....  Therefore the Pope
intrusted to the discretion of the said Venerable Dean and Commissary
to admonish publicly in churches, before the people, ... all holders,
etc., and to discover and restore these to the said Gilbert Wauchope
or to the Abbot of the Monastery, under a general sentence of
excommunication against these persons, till suitable satisfaction was
made.

But the Reformation brought many changes, upsetting the laws,
customs, and opinions held sacred for centuries.  The sons no longer
walked in the ways of their fathers, but began to think for
themselves.  And so we find that Gilbert, the son of the laird who
had sought and obtained protection from the Pope, renounced the Pope
and took {17} an active part in promoting the Reformation.  He was
present at Knox's first sermon at St. Andrews in 1547.  And at the
conference of notables that afterwards was held, where Knox and his
preaching were fully discussed, and Wauchope was asked what he
thought of the Reformer, 'this answer gave the Laird of Nydre--"a man
fervent and uprycht in religioun."'  This Gilbert Wauchope of Niddrie
was a member of the famous Parliament, held at Edinburgh in August
1560, by which the Reformation was established.

Later on we have a George Wauchope, a celebrated Professor of Civil
Law at Caen, in Normandy, who was a grandson of Gilbert, and who in
1595, when he was about twenty-five years of age, wrote _A Treatise
concerning the Ancient People of Rome_.

But the early Wauchopes were a wonderfully varied class of men, who
could take their share of fighting when necessary; and towards the
close of the sixteenth century their feuds, their 'slauchters,' and
political partisanship well-nigh led to their extinction.  The feuds
with the neighbouring Hepburns and Edmonstons were the occasion of
many unhappy conflicts, while their adhesion to the cause of Queen
Mary for a time brought ruin on the family.  Professor Aytoun, in his
poem of 'Bothwell,' referring to Bothwell's attempt to intercept the
Queen on her way from Stirling and carry her to Dunbar Castle, says:--

  'Hay, bid the trumpets sound the march,
    Go, Bolton, to the van;
  Young Niddrie follows with the rear;
    Set forward every man.'


The estate of Niddrie is quite close to Craigmillar Castle, where
Mary frequently resided, and in all {18} probability the fascination
of her character brought the Wauchopes into frequent contact with
her, and led them to espouse her cause when many of the leaders of
the Scottish nobility had declared against her.  We find, therefore,
that Robert Wauchope and his son Archibald are mentioned in the
'charge agains personis denuncit rebellis' in June 1587.  This
Archibald appears to have been a youth of wonderful pugnacity, and to
have got himself continually involved in trouble with the authorities
for breaches of the peace, out of which he as often extricated
himself, with no little cleverness.  Once, in 1588, for an attempted
'slauchter' of 'umquhile James Giffert, and Johne Edmonston,' the
adjoining laird, he was arrested, tried, and warded in the Tolbooth
of Edinburgh; but 'no pardoun being granted' by the king, 'and about
a thousand persouns in the Tolbuith waiting upon the event, the
candles were put furth about ellevin houres at night, and Nidrie and
his complices escaped out at the windowes.'  It is a curious
reflection upon the Wauchopes of this time that their name should be
associated with the wild Clan Gregor of Perthshire as disturbers of
the peace.  King James VI. was married in 1590 to the Princess Anne
of Denmark.  On the 1st May the king and queen landed at Leith, amid
a great concourse of loyal subjects, 'and with volleys of cannon, and
orations in their welcome.'  James had been absent from Scotland more
than six months, and it was remarked at the time, and came to be
memorable afterwards, that these months were a time of universal
peace and good order in Scotland.  'The only notable exceptions,'
according to Spottiswood, 'had been a riot in Edinburgh by Wauchope
of Niddry, and an outbreak of the Clan Gregor in Balquhidder.'

In connection with this, we find Wauchope charged {19} by the Privy
Council (7th January 1590), 'along with all other keepers of the
places and fortalices of Rossyth and Nudry,' to deliver the same to
the officer executing these letters, within six hours after charge,
under penalty of treason; the said officer to fence the goods and
rents belonging to Wauchope, which are ordered to remain under arrest
at the instance of the King's Treasurer, 'aye and quhill he be tryit
foule or clene of sic crymes quharof he is dilaitet.'

[Sidenote: Attack on Holyroodhouse]

Not to mention other scrapes of a similar kind, Archibald Wauchope
was implicated in the attack on the palace of Holyroodhouse, 27th
December 1591, and for this and other misdemeanours he was forfeited,
along with the Earl of Bothwell and others, and had to leave the
country for a time.  He afterwards came to an untimely end by falling
from a window in Skinner's Close in Edinburgh, about the year 1596.

It was apparently about this period that the old house or tower of
Niddrie Marischal--'so commodious that it could garrison a hundred
men'--was destroyed by the enemies of the family.

For some years the estate was in the hands of Sir James Sandilands of
Slamannan, until 1608, when, through the good graces of James VI., it
was restored to Francis, son of Archibald Wauchope, a restitution
which was confirmed by Act of Parliament in 1609.  Francis (usually
styled Sir Francis Wauchope) appears to have done a good deal for the
estate, but his son, Sir John Wauchope, may be regarded as the chief
restorer of the house of Niddrie.  He was frugal in his living, and
he added several adjoining properties to the estate by purchase, and
received the honour of knighthood from Charles I. on his visit to
Scotland in 1633.  He was an intimate friend of the {20} notorious
Duke of Lauderdale in their younger days, living with him, and spoken
of as 'his bed-fellow.'

Sir John exercised great judgment in the management of his affairs;
so much so, that in 1661 he acquired by purchase the border estate of
Yetholm or Lochtour, in Roxburghshire, which has remained in the
family ever since.  He was present in London at the coronation of
Charles II.; in 1663 he was elected a member of the Scottish
Parliament, and one of the Committee for the Plantation of Kirks; and
in 1678 was a member of the Convention of Estates.

Other lairds appear in succession as the years rolled on.  There are
Williams, Andrews, Gilberts, Roberts, following one another as the
leaves succeed in the spring to those that have fallen in the autumn,
but it is not our purpose to follow their story.  One fought and fell
at Killiecrankie with Viscount Dundee in 1689; another fought for the
Stuarts at the Revolution, and afterwards rose to high command in the
French and Spanish services; and though the Wauchopes took no active
part in the Stuart risings of 1715 and 1745, their sympathies were
all for the exiled race.

In Niddrie House there are to be seen full-length portraits of
Charles I. and his queen; four small half-lengths of the Chevalier
and his consort, and their two sons, Prince Charles Edward and the
Cardinal York, as boys.  These are understood to have been forwarded
direct from the Chevalier himself to the Niddrie family as an
acknowledgment of their loyalty, and the assistance--pecuniary and
otherwise--which the royal line of Stuart had received at their hands.

[Sidenote: A 'Minden' hero]

To come to more recent times, we find that Andrew Wauchope of
Niddrie--the great-grandfather of the subject {21} of our sketch,
born about the year 1736--was a captain in the First Regiment of
Dragoon Guards, and fought at the battle of Minden in Westphalia,
where in 1759 the French were defeated by an army of Anglo-Hanoverian
troops.  He lived to a good old age, for it was he who was alluded to
by Sir Walter Scott in the ballad written on the occasion of the
visit of George IV. to Scotland in 1822:--

  Come, stately Niddrie, auld and true,
  Girt with the sword that Minden knew;
  We have owre few sic lairds as you,
      Carle, now the King's come.

This Andrew Wauchope married, in 1786, Alicia, daughter of William
Baird, Newbyth, and sister of the celebrated Sir David Baird, the
hero of Seringapatam, who a few years afterwards--in 1805--commanded
the expedition to the Cape of Good Hope which, after a decisive
victory over the Dutch, received, on 6th January 1806, the surrender
of the colony to Great Britain.  There were nine children of this
marriage, five boys and four girls.  The eldest, Andrew, was killed
in 1813 at the battle of the Pyrenees while in command of the 20th
Regiment of Foot, and so the second son, William, succeeded to the
property, old Andrew Wauchope having resigned it in his favour in
1817, retaining for himself the liferent.

William Wauchope, who had the year before married Elizabeth, eldest
daughter of Robert Baird of Newbyth, and niece of the then
Marchioness of Breadalbane, was a lieutenant-colonel in the army.
Curiously enough, William's younger brother, Admiral Robert Wauchope,
was stationed at Cape Town at the beginning of the century, where he
resided for many years with his wife.  They knew the Dutch well, and
were on the most friendly terms with both Dutch and English settlers
in the colony.

{22}

William Wauchope died in 1826, leaving a family of two, the eldest of
whom, Andrew Wauchope, born in 1818, being then a minor, succeeded to
the property.  His sister, Hersey Susan Sydney, was married in 1842
to George Elliot, captain, Royal Navy, eldest son of the Hon. Admiral
Elliot.  Andrew Wauchope, the father of the subject of our memoir,
was for a time in the army--an officer in the dragoons; but, being of
a delicate constitution, he retired after his marriage to reside at
Niddrie, where he was long known and respected as a kind and
indulgent landlord, ever ready to give a helping hand to his tenants
or to religious and philanthropic objects.  He did a great deal
towards completing the extensive improvements begun by his father on
the house and grounds of Niddrie.

The newer part of the house, forming the north-east wing, was erected
by William Wauchope about seventy-five years ago.  It contains some
handsome apartments, and it is interesting to note that the
celebrated Hugh Miller, when a lad, was employed (in 1823) as a mason
at the work, and is said to have carved a number of the ornamental
chimneys which form a distinctive feature of a most picturesque
edifice.  What the father began, the son ultimately completed.  The
park was extended, new approaches and avenues were formed, lodges
erected, and gardens and vineries laid out--the whole place being
transformed into one of the most beautiful country seats to be found
in the county of Midlothian.  These somewhat extensive works, resumed
by the father of the General about the year 1850, were steadily
carried on year by year until his death, 22nd November 1874, for he
took much pride in the work, and made it his life hobby.

[Sidenote: Sir William Wallace]

So far this brief genealogy of General Wauchope's family has been
traced through the male line, but it would be {23} incomplete and
lacking in public interest, did we not also refer to his descent on
the female side from the family of Sir William Wallace, the champion
of Scottish freedom.  This interesting connection is traced to James
Wauchope, the grandfather of the 'Minden' hero.  In 1710 he married
Jane, daughter of Sir William Wallace, Bart, of Craigie, near Ayr,
whose eldest son, Andrew, succeeded his cousin in 1726, and in his
line the property has remained to the present time.

[Illustration: Niddrie Marishchal, Front View]

Over the fireplace of the dining-room of Niddrie House there is a
painting on canvas inserted in panelling said to be a portrait of
'Wallace Wight.'  It has been in possession of the family for nearly
two hundred years, being mentioned in various inventories of the
property from the year 1707.  An interesting notice of it appeared in
James Paterson's _Wallace and his Times_, and the family tradition is
that it is a genuine portrait of the hero, the words inscribed above
the likeness, 'Gvl: Wallas: Scotvs: Host: ivm: Terror,' certainly
giving colour to the supposition.  We are more inclined to think,
however, that the portrait represents one of the more immediate
ancestors of the Jane Wallace who brought the connection into the
family--probably Sir William Wallace of Craigie, who distinguished
himself as a loyalist in the civil wars.  It certainly came into the
family through the marriage of James Wauchope in 1710 with Jane,
daughter of Sir William Wallace of Craigie, and if it does not
represent the champion of Scottish independence, it is from the same
source as a similar portrait preserved at Priory Lodge, Cheltenham,
in the hands of a descendant of the Craigie-Wallace family.

It was when he was serving with his regiment at Monaghan, in Ireland,
that the father of General Wauchope first met his future wife,
Frances Maria, daughter of Henry Lloyd of {24} Lloydsburgh, County
Tipperary.  They were married on 26th March 1840, and two sons and
two daughters were the issue of the marriage.  These were--

1. William John Wauchope, born in September 1841.

2. Harriet Elizabeth Frances, afterwards married to Lord Ventry of
County Kerry, Ireland, by whom she has issue, five sons and four
daughters, of whom her daughter, the Hon Hersey Alice
Eveleigh-De-Moleyne, is the present Countess of Hopetoun.

3. Andrew Gilbert, the subject of our story, born at Niddrie on 5th
July 1846.

4. Hersey Josephine Frances Mary, now residing in London.


A typical Scotsman, loyal to the backbone to the land of his birth,
Andrew Gilbert Wauchope had always a warm corner in his heart for
Ireland, and was ever ready to acknowledge, and indeed to boast of,
his Irish extraction.  Combining as he did much of the canniness of
the Scot with that steady-going determination of purpose and
fearlessness in danger peculiar to his countrymen, he displayed the
Irish side of his character in that generous light-heartedness and
impulsive good nature which often led him into self-denying deeds of
kindness, and now and again into trouble.  General Wauchope was, as
we have seen, the heir to no mean family traditions.  The record of
the Wauchopes is one of patriotic energy through five or six hundred
years of stirring Scottish history, many of them years of turmoil and
strife; and the warlike spirit of the fathers, as well as their more
peaceful characteristics, may be found not infrequently imaged in
this last scion of the race.




{25}

CHAPTER II

CHILDHOOD--EARLY TENDENCIES--THE 'HOUSEHOLD TROOP'--EDUCATION--NAVAL
TRAINING--THE 'BRITANNIA'--THE 'ST. GEORGE'--PRINCE ALFRED.


General Wauchope's boyhood was spent mostly at Niddrie, with
occasional short visits in summer to the other property of the family
at Yetholm, among the pastoral Cheviot hills.

A high-spirited, frolicsome boy, delighting in the open air and every
kind of outdoor sport, 'Andy,' as he was familiarly called, found
scope for his energies in the beautifully wooded park surrounding the
house.  Bird-nesting, rabbit-catching, and fishing in the burn which
meanders through the estate, found him an ardent enthusiast, but
often brought him into trouble with his father and mother.  His
bird-nesting feats, prosecuted with all the zest of a professional
poacher, often resulted in the dislocation of his clothes, and shoes
and stockings too often betrayed the fact that friendly visits to the
burn were more frequent and prolonged than ought to be.  Many a time
Andy was thus in a sore plight.  Drenched and torn, he would go to
the kindly gardener's wife, to get the rents in his jacket sewed, his
stockings changed, and his shoes dried, before venturing into the
family presence.  In his adventures over the property, the burn was
never a barrier to his {26} progress.  It was the same with hedges,
ditches, or stone walls.  If he wanted to reach a certain point, he
made a straight road to it over every obstacle.

[Sidenote: Youthful tendencies]

But the limits of the park did not always satisfy his roving desires.
He soon made himself acquainted with the surroundings of his home.
Craigmillar Castle was a favourite resort on the one side; the beach
at Portobello gave him a taste for the sea and aquatic exercise;
while the neighbouring little village of Niddrie was not long in
making his acquaintance.  Here he was known to every one, for Andy
made himself at home in every cottage; and if the boys stood in some
awe of him, and mothers blamed him for sending their sons home with
their clothes torn, or their noses bleeding, still, for all that, he
was always welcomed among them, sometimes with a 'jeelie' (jelly)
piece or a new-baked scone!

Many a frolic he and the boys of the village were engaged in, if all
tales were told, and sometimes Andy got credit for more than he
deserved.  Boys will be boys, but his boyhood early showed the spirit
of the man, for to have a number of country boys together, and put
them through military drill, was the height of his delight.  He was a
born leader, and he doubtless imbibed his love of soldiering from the
frequent opportunities he had of seeing military manoeuvres in the
Queen's Park, or more likely on Portobello sands, where at that time
there was a great deal of drilling, both of the regulars and of the
yeomanry cavalry.  That the military instinct revealed itself early
may be gathered from the following:--One day the village dominie,
worthy old Mr. Savage, looking out of the school door across the
road, saw the youthful form of Andy--then about seven or eight years
old--on the top of the high boundary wall of his father's park, which
at that place is {27} nearly nine feet high.  'What are you doing up
there?' shouted the dominie; 'get down at once, you young rascal, or
you'll get killed!'  But Andy only waved his hand as he shouted back,
'It's all right, Mr. Savage: I'm only viewing the enemy,' and off he
scampered along the top of the wall!

Andy's 'household troop' was not a large one, but it sufficed.  With
Tom and Jim, the gardener's sons, and their sisters, Jess and Bella,
assisted by a few male and female recruits from among the children of
the other workers, with his sister Fanny and his cousins Elizabeth
and Nina Elliot, now Lady Northesk and Mrs. J. Dacre Butler
respectively--one of whom carried the banner, and another the
drum--the youthful general managed to make a fair show.  He drilled
them well, and was naturally very proud of them.  One day there
happened to be company at the house.  Andy, anxious to display his
forces, marched them up to the front door, and there, seated on his
little black pony 'Donald,' he put them through their facings, to the
great entertainment of the visitors.  He was not content with this,
however.  He must needs take the place by storm, and so, putting
himself at the head of his troop, he gave the word of command,
'Forward, march!' and actually marched them into the hall, and
through the dining-room to the terrace at the back of the house,
bravely leading them on his pony!

The ice-house stood in the park not very far from the house.  It was
a vaulted chamber covered with turf, forming externally a mound which
made a capital fort.  Many a time was it the scene of mimic warfare,
its defence or assault giving splendid scope for the youthful
general's military genius,--brilliant attacks being as brilliantly
defeated without any great loss of life!

Sometimes 'Andy's' attacks took a wider range, and {28} nocturnal
escapades of a frolicking nature are said to have been not
infrequent.  It is told of him that having gathered a few of the
village boys together, they made a raid one night upon the workshop
of the village joiner, and took away a number of odd cart-wheels
lying about in the yard.  These they fastened to the doors of some of
the cottages, where they were found next morning, much to the
surprise of the inmates, who had some difficulty in getting egress
from their houses!  Nobody, of course, could tell who was to blame;
but, as our informant remarked, 'They a' kent wha did it: it was just
some o' Maister Andra's mischief.'

One old woman in the village, whose temper was not very good, and who
laboured under the conviction that her hen-house was from time to
time robbed of its roosters, had made herself somewhat obnoxious, and
it was determined to give her a real fright.  So one evening, after
all decent folks were supposed to be in bed, Andy and his company
slipped quietly round to the hen-house, and presently there was a
great commotion and cackling among the feathered occupants.  The old
lady in her bed heard it all, but was too frightened to come to the
rescue.  She was certain, however, that some of her favourite hens
had been taken, and next day she went up to the laird at the big
house to complain, and to ask compensation.  Andy was with his father
when the old woman was laying off her story, but betrayed no signs of
his complicity in the transaction, wisely preferring to keep his own
counsel in the matter.  Of course the boys had taken none of her
property.  They only wanted to play a trick upon her.

Andy was, however, not a boy who would perpetrate any wilful
mischief, or do anything that would cause pain.  He hated cruelty,
and once when he was accused of having {29} killed the cat of an old
servant of the family, who lived as a pensioner in the village, he
heard the accusation with the greatest indignation.  Going at once to
Mary's house he strongly asserted his innocence, telling her with all
earnestness, 'I'd rather shoot myself, as shoot your cat, Mary.'

Very early in life he evinced a strong desire to share in the sport
of the hunting-field.  His father would not, however, hear of it, and
refused to allow him to get a proper rig-out.  But Master Andrew was
not to be balked in his ambition, for one morning, getting into a
pair of his father's top-boots, many sizes too large for him, and
securing the biggest horse in the stables, he boldly set off for the
hunt.  The appearance of such a mite with boots that would scarcely
keep on his feet, on the back of a big hunter, created great laughter
among the county gentry at the meet.

[Sidenote: Early education]

During these early years of Wauchope's life, so free from restraint,
his education was being carried on at home under a tutor.  At the age
of eleven he was sent to a school at Worksop, in Nottinghamshire, but
he did not remain there very long.  He had a hankering for active
life, and specially for the sea.  It was accordingly resolved to
prepare him for entering the navy as a midshipman, and he was sent to
Foster's School, Stubbington House, Gosport.  His experience here was
also a short one, and was marked by an incident characteristic of his
spirit of adventure and faithfulness to obligations; though in this
case we must say the latter virtue was rather misapplied, and it
might well be said 'his faith unfaithful kept him falsely true.'  The
boys at Foster's, evidently wanting to vary the monotony of school
life--perhaps none of the brightest--thought it would be a good lark
if one would run away from the school, and they resolved to draw lots
who it {30} should be.  The lot fell upon young Andy Wauchope, and,
like the loyal lad he was, he resolutely stuck to the agreement and
ran off from the school, but of course he was promptly brought back
by his people, and no doubt received the just reward of his frolic!

He used to say long afterwards that he had only been at two schools
when he was a boy.  'At one of them he was said to be the best boy in
the school, but at the other he was the very worst!'

With what would now be considered a very inadequate training, young
Wauchope was on the 10th September 1859 entered as a naval cadet on
board Her Majesty's ship _Britannia_, there to pick up in the rough
school of a sailor's life that knowledge of the world, and
particularly of his naval duties, which books and schooling had
denied him.  At the same time, though deprived of the advantages of
Eton or Harrow, or any of the Scottish Universities, he had a much
better gift than education--an immense natural shrewdness, and a
persevering application, which afterwards made him a good French and
German scholar.  Among his shipmates on the _Britannia_ he was a
general favourite.  He was only thirteen years of age, but appears to
have been a plucky little fellow, full of life and fun, and quite
capable of standing up for himself, or for a friend if need be; and
in the thirteen months of his service in the ship he made several
lifelong friendships.  Admiral Lord Charles Beresford, writing to us
of that period, mentions that he and Wauchope joined the navy about
the same time.  'I remember,' he says, 'our chests were close
together in the _Britannia_.  We separated when we went to sea, but
we never lost the friendship we formed in the _Britannia_.  We met
often in different parts of the world, and I always {31} found him
the same sterling, honest, strong, and chivalrous friend, whose
splendid characteristics had so impressed me as a boy.  I have always
regarded his friendship for me with sentiments of pride.  He was very
proud of being a Scotsman, and being an Irishman myself, we had many
arguments--as boys will have--as to which nation possessed the most
interesting personalities.  We agreed cordially on every other point,
but never once on this.  The nation has lost one of its best in poor
Andy Wauchope.'  There are doubtless others of his _Britannia_
shipmates surviving who could give similar testimony.

[Sidenote: Enters the Navy]

On the 5th October 1860, Wauchope received his discharge from the
_Britannia_, and was entered as a midshipman on board H.M.S. _St.
George_, and he mentions himself with what pride and satisfaction he
found himself on that autumn day walking down the main street of
Portsmouth in his new uniform to join the _St. George_.  'It was one
of the happiest days of my life,' he says; 'a day in which I felt
myself identified as an officer in Her Majesty's service, more
particularly as on the way down to the harbour I was met and saluted
by one of the marines.'

The _St. George_ was manned by eight hundred men, and in 1860 was
considered a well-equipped vessel, and as compared with the days of
Nelson and Collingwood showed a great advance in naval strength and
efficiency.  At Trafalgar the biggest gun in the whole British fleet
was only a fifty-six pounder, but the _St. George_ had in addition to
a number of that calibre several sixty-eight pounders, while her
speed of ten knots an hour was considered highly satisfactory.
Though these equipments would not bear comparison with present-day
standards, the young midshipman was proud of his ship and proud of
the service, and in after years could with no little exultation {32}
honestly say that, 'though armaments had changed, the hearts of oak
remained as of yore; while the old red rag, which had withstood the
battle and the breeze for a thousand years, was still able to claim
the allegiance of its people.'

[Sidenote: H.R.H. Prince Alfred]

Wauchope's commanding officer on board the _St. George_ was Captain
the Hon. Francis Egerton--whose son, Commander Egerton, was killed at
Ladysmith in November 1899--and among his brother officers were
H.R.H. Prince Alfred, afterwards the Duke of Edinburgh, and latterly
known as the Duke of Saxe-Coburg Gotha, and Admiral Sir Robert
Harris, now Commander-in-Chief of the Cape of Good Hope station.

The _St. George_ was commissioned at Portsmouth, and was transferred
to Devonport early in 1861.  She was then one of the noblest and most
imposing-looking ships of the service, having the year before been
thoroughly overhauled and converted from a one hundred and twenty gun
ship to one of ninety guns.  As a three-decker sailing ship she was
considered one of the finest fighting vessels afloat, and her
conversion to a steamship of the line had been attended with the most
successful results.  She was selected by Prince Albert for his son,
the youthful Prince Alfred, who joined her as a midshipman a few
months after Wauchope--on the 16th January 1861--as she lay in
Plymouth Sound, under orders for a cruise to the British North
American Stations and the West India Islands.

The greater part of the year seems to have been spent in and about
Halifax, the capital of Nova Scotia, which became a centre for
cruises in the Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Canadian ports.  We have
it on the authority of several of those who were midshipmen with the
Prince, that they were a jovial, happy company, all on the most
friendly {33} terms with one another.  The Prince, who was very fond
of 'Andy,' as he was always called, showed him particular friendship,
and the affection which as boys and shipmates they formed then
continued more or less in later years.

The Prince came back to England in the month of August to spend a
short holiday with his parents at Balmoral, but rejoined his ship,
which was lying at Halifax, in October.  His return was welcomed by
his mates and by the citizens of that town; and the Governor, the
Earl of Mulgrave, entertained His Royal Highness and the officers of
the _St. George_ at a state dinner on the eve of their departure for
a cruise to Bermuda.  Among the sunny islands of the South the ship
and her crew were everywhere received with the utmost enthusiasm, the
black and white population alike vying with each other in their
demonstrations of loyalty; but the sudden death of the Prince Consort
at the end of December compelled the return home for a time of Prince
Alfred, who left his ship at Halifax on receipt of the sad news, with
every expression of sympathy from his brother officers.  In the
spring of 1862 Wauchope's ship paid another visit to the West India
Islands, taking up her station for some weeks with other six ships of
the line at Bermuda, where the young 'middies' were entertained to a
continued round of amusements and excursions.

A seafaring life, if often one of risks and toil, has its seasons of
enforced idleness.  Midshipmen's amusements and practical jokes are
proverbial, and the quarter-deck of the _St. George_ was not always
free of them.  Many pranks were played upon one another in idle hours
by these sprightly young officers, leading sometimes to reprimands by
their superiors; and young Andy Wauchope did not {34} always escape
the suspicion that he was an active leader in such ploys.  It has
even been hinted that he had on one occasion the pluck--or, shall we
say, audacity?--to have a stand-up fight with the Queen's son.  We do
not vouch for the story; but of this we are certain, that, if he had
a just cause of quarrel, he was not the boy to let even the prestige
of royalty stand between him and the punishment due to the aggressor,
whoever he might be.

Some years afterwards, in the winter of 1863-64, when Prince Alfred
resided at Holyrood Palace, and was a student of Edinburgh
University, he paid a friendly visit to his old shipmate at Niddrie,
spending the day in pigeon-shooting.  He and a number of his friends
arrived in the forenoon on horseback, and the identity of the party
not having been made known to the keeper of the Niddrie toll, through
which they had to pass to reach the house, he peremptorily insisted
upon payment.  But being told that it was the Queen's son going to
see the laird, his loyalty so much got the better of him that he
would not take a copper.

After luncheon the party adjourned to the park to have some shooting.
Mr. Wauchope, 'Andy's' father, was with them, and was persuaded to
try a shot, but unfortunately the piece went off in his hand before
he could take aim, and one of the footmen in attendance was hit in
the arm by the charge.  Mr. Wauchope was so distressed over the
accident that he vowed he would never again take a gun in his hand.

[Illustration: ANDREW WAUCHOPE, Midshipman, Age 14.]

But it was not in the navy that young Wauchope was destined to
distinguish himself.  It has been said that the severity and even
harshness of the naval discipline gave him a distaste of the service,
and drove him from it.  Possibly some remarks he made on one occasion
as to his {35} having been unjustly punished for some petty offence
may have given some colour to this supposition.  We rather incline to
accept the explanation of a brother officer, who asked him afterwards
why he left the navy.  His reply was, 'for no reason except that his
father wished him, and that his father desired that he should have a
naval training before he entered the army.'

[Sidenote: The St. George]

The experience gained at sea was certainly not lost, for his father's
wisdom furnished him with a dual equipment which in after years was
not infrequently of value.  The injustice of the punishment he
received when in the _St. George_, whatever it may have been,
certainly impressed itself upon him to this extent, that later in
life he made it a rule never to punish a soldier until thoroughly
satisfied of his guilt, and he always was inclined to give a man the
benefit of a doubt.

The _St. George_ returned home in the beginning of July 1862 from her
long cruise in American waters, and with her return young Wauchope
closed his naval career.  The official Admiralty record simply states
that 'on the 3rd of July 1862 Midshipman Wauchope was discharged from
the service at his own request, in order that he might qualify for
the army.'  His whole naval experience, therefore, covered a period
of scarcely three years, but it gave him a knowledge of men and
things, and a knowledge of the world, better, perhaps, than any study
of books could afford.




{36}

CHAPTER III

ENTERS THE ARMY--THE BLACK WATCH--ASHANTI WAR--RETURN HOME--BANQUET
AT PORTOBELLO.


Young Wauchope had not long to wait for a commission.  At that time
positions in the army could only be got by purchase and strong
influence, but he was fortunate in being enrolled as ensign, in
November 1865, in the 42nd Highlanders, one of the most popular and
distinguished of Scottish regiments, and familiarly known as the
'Black Watch.'  He was only nineteen years of age at the time when he
joined the regiment at Stirling Castle, and is described by one of
his superiors as then 'a merry, rollicking lad, full of life and
fun.'  'Andy,' as he used to be called by the officers, and 'Red
Mick' more frequently by the men, was a general favourite; and,
notwithstanding his natural lightness of heart, he had soundness of
brain and judgment enough to know that promotion would only come to
him by diligent study and close application to his profession.  His
commanding officer, Sir John M'Leod, appears, at all events, to have
been struck with the young man's energy of character and
indefatigable 'go,' for he describes him as at that time 'a
particularly energetic young lad, who thought nothing of walking from
Stirling to Niddrie to see his old father whenever he could get a few
days' leave at a week-end.'  This, he explains, was not {37} at all
from motives of economy, 'but merely to walk off superfluous energy.'
Assiduous in the matter of drill, Wauchope soon became as proficient
as his instructor, for he took a thorough pleasure in the exercise.
The innate smartness and recklessness of the red-polled ensign at
once endeared him to a grave old Crimean drill-sergeant, who
forthwith charged himself with his training.  Concerning this latest
accession to the commissioned strength of the Black Watch, the man of
stripes was wont to say--'That red-headed Wauchope chap will either
gang tae the deil, or he'll dee Commander-in-Chief!'

[Sidenote: The Black Watch]

Though the worthy sergeant's prediction has in neither case been
verified, young Wauchope, though at first inclined to consider his
superiors a trifle slow, soon fell into the steady sober ways of the
42nd, then as now noted for the gentlemanly conduct of its officers,
and the upright character of its rank and file.  'Step out,
shentlemens; step out.  You're all shentlemens here; if you're not
shentlemens in the Black Watch, you'll not be shentlemens anywhere.'
Such was the opinion of their old Highland sergeant as he put them
through their drill.  We have been told that at that time one might
be a year among the officers and never hear an oath uttered, while
smoking and drinking were scarcely known.  Wauchope was thus
fortunate in being, at a critical period of his life, associated with
men who shunned what was vulgar, and whose influence over him was for
good.  In military matters he early manifested the inquiring mind.
Points in drill or tactics, which he might not at first understand,
set him thinking, and he would not rest till he got an explanation of
their meaning and object.  Captain Christie, then adjutant of the
Black Watch, lately governor of Edinburgh Prison, was early taken
into the young ensign's {38} confidence in difficulties of this kind.
Having been through the hard fighting and the terrible scenes of the
Indian Mutiny, the captain was made frequently to 'fight his battles
o'er again,' explaining the methods and tactics by which decisive
results were attained in the various engagements.  Never what may be
called a great reader of books, Wauchope had two, however, placed in
his hand by his adjutant when in Stirling Castle, which he studied
assiduously.  These two books--Macaulay's _Essays_ and Burke's
_French Revolution_--he read and re-read, borrowing them several
times, and there is little doubt that the perusal of them made a deep
and lasting impression upon his mind, going a long way towards the
formation of that strong political sagacity, administrative ability
in civil affairs, and military genius which were displayed on many
occasions in his after-life.

In 1867 Wauchope went to Hythe, where he passed in the Military
School of Instruction first-class in musketry, and in June of that
year was promoted to be lieutenant.  So proficient was he found in
the matter of drill that, in spite of his youth, he was appointed to
the important position of adjutant to the regiment in 1870, though
still retaining the rank of lieutenant, a position which he held with
the utmost credit for the next three years.  During this time he
served successively with the 42nd in garrison duty at Edinburgh,
Aldershot, and Devonport.

Leaving Edinburgh in 1869 by the transport _Orontes_, from Granton to
Portsmouth, the regiment reached Aldershot camp on the 12th November,
and was stationed there for two and a half years.  After taking a
part in the Autumn Manoeuvres at Dartmoor in August 1873, they were
stationed for a few months at the Clarence Barracks, Portsmouth.  His
duties during all these years were of the {39} most arduous and
trying description, but his singularly lovable and attractive nature
made him so many friends that difficulties disappeared before his
cheerful countenance.  Speaking of this period in his career, Colonel
Bayly, afterwards his commanding officer, says--'It was very early in
his subaltern career that Wauchope was voted for the appointment of
adjutant, and he made one of the best that had ever been appointed.
His charm of disposition enabled him to gain the love of his men,
whilst his tact and firmness enabled him to enforce the necessary
discipline.'

[Sidenote: Ashanti war]

On the outbreak of the Ashanti war on the west coast of Africa in the
autumn of 1873, young Lieutenant Wauchope found his first
opportunity, in active foreign service, of showing the metal of which
he was made.

The king of Ashanti--Koffee Kalcallee--the head of a strong warlike
kingdom on the north of the Gold Coast, had long asserted his
authority over the neighbouring provinces of Akim, Assin, Gaman, and
Denkira, down to the very coast where the Dutch and English had
settlements.  The transfer, in 1872, of the Dutch possessions
adjoining Cape Coast Castle to Great Britain for certain commercial
privileges, gave King Koffee of Ashanti the opportunity for asserting
what he considered his lawful authority over the Fantees or adjoining
coast tribe.  This, however, was only a covert excuse for striking a
blow at British rule on the Gold Coast, and in January 1873 an army
of 60,000 warriors--and the Ashantis, though cruel, are brave and
warlike--was in full march upon Cape Coast Castle and Elmina.  The
British force on the spot under Colonel Harley was only a thousand
men, mainly West India troops and Haussa police, with a few marines;
and though the neighbouring friendly tribes, whose interest it {40}
was to remain under the British protectorate, raised a large
contingent for their own defence, this was a force that could not be
relied on.  By the month of April the Ashantis had crossed the river
Prah, the southern limit of their kingdom, and were within a few
miles of Cape Coast Castle, and matters were looking serious.  With
the aid of a small reinforcement of marines, the enemy were
fortunately kept at bay until the 2nd October, when a strong force
arrived from England, which turned the tide against King Koffee, and
ultimately swept him and his warriors back upon his capital.  This
expedition, under Major-General Sir Garnet Wolseley, with his staff
and a body of five hundred sailors and marines, not only held their
own, but by the end of November, after much hard preliminary work,
had forced the king to retreat to Kumasi.  Wolseley, finding the
expedition a more arduous one than was at first expected, had
meantime asked for further reinforcements, and on the 4th December
the Black Watch, accompanied by a considerable number of volunteers
from the 79th, left Portsmouth, arriving on 4th January 1874 at their
destination.  Sir Garnet had now at his disposal a force consisting
of the 23rd, 42nd, and 2nd Battalion Rifle Brigade, detachments of
Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, and Royal Marines, which, with
native levies, formed a small but effective army wherewith to advance
into the enemy's country.

This was no light task, more especially when the dangerous nature of
the climate is taken into account, and the necessity there was that
the enterprise should be accomplished, if at all, before the rainy
season, with all its concomitant malaria, set in.  To pierce into the
heart of a country like Ashanti, with its marshes and matted forests,
its pathless jungles and fetid swamps, with a {41} cunning foe ever
dogging their steps, was the service imposed on this brave little
army of British.  As Lord Derby remarked at the time, this was to be
'an engineers' and doctors' war.'  Roads had to be made, bridges
built, telegraphs set up, and camps formed.  But by the energy and
skill of General Wolseley, ably supported by such men as Captain (now
Sir) Redvers Buller, Colonel (afterwards Sir John) N'Neil,
Lieut.-Colonel (afterwards Sir Evelyn) Wood, Colonel (now Sir John)
M'Leod, and others who have since risen to distinction in the army,
the enterprise was successfully and brilliantly accomplished within a
month.  The Ashantis were forced back upon their own territory in a
number of engagements, until at last their capital was seized and
burned to the ground.

[Sidenote: Wauchope's black boys]

Lieutenant Wauchope's share in this expedition was highly creditable
to his bravery and military skill.  Accompanying Sir Garnet Wolseley
at an early stage of the struggle, as one of the staff, he resigned
his adjutantship of the Black Watch, and was afterwards fortunate in
obtaining special employment as a commander of one of the native
regiments formed at Cape Coast Castle, namely, Russell's regiment of
Haussas, the Winnebah Company.  To form such crude material into a
well-disciplined body of soldiers seemed at first a well-nigh
hopeless undertaking.  Their fear made cowards of them all.  The very
sight of a gun terrified them, and for long they held their arms in
such superstitious dread, that they would hang them up in the trees
and actually worship them.  But Wauchope's admirable drilling
qualifications stood him in good stead.  He took, we are told, a
great pride in the training of his 'black boys,' as he called them,
and infused into them much of his own daring spirit.  This
appointment separated him for a time from his own regiment, but on
{42} the Black Watch arriving afterwards at the Gold Coast, he had
frequent opportunities of fighting by their side.

In the advanced guard, the 42d Regiment and Russell's Haussas, under
Colonel M'Leod, having crossed the Adansi hills, reached Prah-su on
the 30th January, and occupied a position about two miles from the
Ashanti main position at Amoaful.  Surmounting innumerable
difficulties, and carrying all before them, the Highlanders by their
dash and intrepidity were a splendid example to those led by
Wauchope, who sometimes had difficulty in inspiring his men with
courage enough to face their much-dreaded enemy.  In scouting and
clearing the ground his men were, however, invaluable, and if we
consider the dense undergrowth that covered the country traversed,
this was a work of great importance.  By one traveller we are told
'the country hereabout (at Amoaful) is one dense mass of brush,
penetrated by a few narrow lanes, where the ground, hollowed by
rains, is so uneven and steep at the sides as to give scanty footing.
A passenger between the two walls of foliage may wander for hours
before he finds that he has mistaken the path.  To cross the country
from one narrow clearing to another, axes and knives must be used at
every step.  There is no looking over the hedge in this oppressive
and bewildering maze.'  It was in such a position as this that the
battle of Amoaful was fought.  The enemy's army was never seen in
open order, but its numbers are reported by Ashantis to have been
from fifteen to twenty thousand.  After a stubborn day's fight in the
entanglement of the forest, the Ashantis were finally defeated with
great loss.

[Sidenote: Attack on Kumasi]

On the 1st February, the day following this important engagement,
orders were issued for an attack upon Becquah, towards which Captain
Buller and Lord Gifford {43} scouted at daybreak.  The attack was
intrusted to Sir Archibald Alison, who had under his orders the Naval
Brigade, one gun and one rocket detachment, Rait's Artillery,
detachment of Royal Engineers, with labourers, 23rd Fusiliers, five
companies of 42nd Highlanders, and Russell's regiment of Haussas,
with scouts.  This force was divided into an advanced guard and main
body, and Wauchope was again honoured with the post of danger, his
regiment of Haussas being in the advanced guard along with the Naval
Brigade and Rail's Artillery, all under the command of Colonel
M'Leod.  After a toilsome march through the bush under a tropical
sun, the town of Becquah was reached, and a sharp but decisive
engagement took place, the main brunt of which fell upon Lord
Gifford's scouts and the Haussas.  Still pressing on, the intrepid
little army, through many mazy trampings, arrived at Jarbinbah, every
inch of the ground being disputed by the enemy.  Here Wauchope was
wounded in the chest by a slug fired down upon him from one of the
tall trees in the swampy ground in front of an ambuscade; but,
serious enough though it was, and causing much loss of blood, it did
not prevent him sticking to his post and looking after his 'black
boys.'  After this battle King Koffee sent in a letter to Sir Garnet
Wolseley, with vague promises of an indemnity, hoping to prevent the
invading army approaching his capital; but his previous
prevarications did not admit of his tardy proposals being for a
moment entertained.  The king, realising this, resolved to dispute
the passage of the river Ordah.  The stream was about fifty feet
wide, and waist-deep, and the enemy, to the number of at least 10,000
men, were posted on the further side.  Russell's regiment of Haussas
was, on the afternoon of the 3rd February, at once passed to the
other side of the stream as a covering party to the Engineers, who
{44} were ordered to throw over a bridge.  They rapidly made
entrenchments, and cleared the ground on the north side, so that the
whole advanced guard might successfully cross.  In this affair
Lieutenant Wauchope acquitted himself with much coolness and bravery,
notwithstanding his wounded state, Colonel M'Leod reporting the
regiment as 'being in front the whole day, and having behaved with
remarkable steadiness under trying circumstances, _reserving their
fire_ with remarkable self-control.'  This shows a decided
improvement in the discipline of Wauchope's 'black boys' from a
former despatch, where their firing was characterised as 'wild.' By
daybreak on the morning of the 4th February the bridge over the Ordah
was completed, amid drenching rain, which had continued all night,
and the whole available force was successfully passed over in spite
of the vigorous resistance of the Ashantis, who, with drums beating
and great shouting, were endeavouring to circle round the British.
'For the first half-mile from the river the path rose tolerably
even,' says one report; 'then after a rapid descent it passed along a
narrow ridge with a ravine on each side; dipped again deeply, and
then finally rose into the village.  To the south-west of the
village, extending almost to the village itself, and for a
considerable distance along the road, the enemy had made a clearing
of several acres, by cutting down a plantain-grove.  Colonel M'Leod
steadily advanced along the main road under cover of a gun, after a
few rounds from which the Rifles made a corresponding advance; then
the gun was brought up again, and another advance made; and in this
manner the village was at last reached and carried.'  The Ashantis
fought well, and with a vigour and pertinacity which won the praise
and admiration of the Highlanders.  The soldiers were put to their
mettle, and even the Haussas, as if {45} catching the fierce courage
of the Scotsmen, laboured with vigour and energy not eclipsed by any
in the field.  The dislodgment of the enemy was not effected,
however, without considerable loss, Lieutenant Eyre being killed,
while Wauchope received a second severe wound, this time on the
shoulder.

[Sidenote: Kumasi captured]

The battle virtually decided the fate of Kumasi and King Koffee.  On
the news of the defeat of his army the king fled, no one knew
whither, and the victorious General Wolseley, with his troops,
entered the blood-stained capital in the evening.  Attempts were made
to negotiate with the king.  He preferred to keep in hiding, and
after two days' stay in his capital in order, if possible, to compel
him to come to terms, it was at length resolved to destroy the place
and at once retire to Cape Coast Castle.  Kumasi was burned to the
ground on the 6th February, and the British troops having
accomplished their purpose retraced their steps, and notwithstanding
the swollen state of the rivers--for the rainy season had just set
in--their destination was reached in twelve days.  No time was lost
in getting the troops out of the influence of the deadly climate, and
accordingly by the 4th March the whole expeditionary force was
embarked for home.

Wauchope's wounds, thanks to a good constitution, readily healed, and
by the time of his arrival at Portsmouth he was fairly convalescent,
though every effort made to extract the slug had been unsuccessful.
He left his favourite Haussas--his 'black boys'--with every
manifestation of regret, at Cape Coast Castle.  Nor was the regret
only on his side, for we learn from one of his brother officers that
'they looked up to him as a father, and would willingly have followed
him through any danger, even to death itself.'

{46}

[Sidenote: Home again]

For his conspicuous bravery in the various engagements in Ashanti,
Sir Garnet Wolseley's despatches brought Wauchope under the
favourable notice of the Government, and he was awarded the Ashanti
medal and clasp.  On the return of the troops, they were received
with the utmost enthusiasm, commanders and men being fêted and
thanked, both at Cape Coast Castle and in England, for their
brilliant services.  The expedition entered Portsmouth in March 1874,
with loud demonstrations of welcome, the Black Watch especially
coming in for a large share of popular attention.

Sir Garnet Wolseley had in London and elsewhere a repetition of the
extraordinary reception he and his followers had experienced at Cape
Coast Castle on their triumphal return from Kumasi.

A civic banquet was given in April by the Lord Mayor of London in the
Egyptian Hall, at which nearly three hundred guests sat down,
including nearly all the officers of the expedition.  Among those
present were the Prince of Wales, Prince Arthur, the Duke of
Cambridge, and the Duke of Teck, besides a number of members of the
Cabinet.  But although the bulk of the honours naturally fell to Sir
Garnet Wolseley and the senior officers of the expedition, and
Wauchope's name scarcely appears in these public demonstrations, his
friends in Scotland had their eye upon the young lieutenant who had
in a few short months carved out for himself a distinguished
reputation, and had added to the laurels of the house of Niddrie.
The people of Portobello specially determined to show their
appreciation of his gallant services by a public banquet, and though
at first the natural modesty of the young soldier shrank from such a
recognition of his services, after some persuasion he consented.  The
{47} banquet took place on the 12th June in the Town Hall.  There was
a large gathering of the principal inhabitants.  Provost Wood
presided, and was supported by, among others, Sir James Gardiner
Baird, Lord Ventry, and a number of county gentry.

In proposing the toast of the evening, Provost Wood took occasion to
say:--'We are met to do honour to a soldier who volunteered to serve
on the staff of General Wolseley in the recent war.  At that time it
was thought that British troops would not be required, but that the
friendly natives, commanded and disciplined by British officers,
would be able to cope with the savage Ashantis.  Lieutenant Wauchope,
on his arrival at the Gold Coast, was appointed one of the officers
of the Haussas--a body of natives who proved themselves superior in
courage and endurance to any of our African allies.  Commanded and
led by British officers--the chief being the gallant Lord
Gifford--these troops did much valuable service.  They formed the van
of our advancing army, and were frequently engaged in the most severe
and wild fighting.  Our guest, in his ardour to see active service,
had voluntarily separated himself from his own regiment.  Yet he was
destined to share with them the dangers and glory of the war.  The
War Office, finding that the Ashantis were more formidable than was
at first expected, and that our native allies were less to be relied
upon, resolved to send out British troops.  This meeting must feel
proud, as an assemblage of Scotsmen, that the 42nd Royal Highlanders
was one of the chosen regiments, and our guest must have felt
gratified when he found he had an opportunity of fighting beside his
own regiment at Amoaful; and at that place, while leading on his
Haussas, our gallant guest was wounded.  He did not, however, fall to
the rear, but continued to {48} push forward, and, along with the
glorious 42nd, he entered the now famous city of Kumasi.  I need
scarcely recall the events of the campaign--how a very small British
army, with little assistance from native allies, in the course of a
few weeks beat and shattered the enormous Ashanti forces, and
compelled the hitherto unconquered Ashantis to sue for peace, and
give freedom and security to the country round.  It has always been
the pride and the pleasure of the people of this country to do honour
to those who have fought and bled for their country's cause,
especially so when that cause is associated, as it was in this
instance, with the spread of civilisation and the prevention and
prohibition of slavery and cruelty.  The newspaper reports showed us
that the Lothians had gallant representatives at the Ashanti war, and
the people of Portobello felt proud to see the old and honoured name
of Wauchope prominently noticed.  We also felt a desire to give
expression to the sympathy and respect we entertain for the house of
Niddrie by a public demonstration in honour of a young scion of that
house, who has proved that he has within him a dauntless spirit
worthy of his ancient lineage.  We desire this evening to
congratulate our guest, that a kind Providence has guarded his life,
and protected him through the imminent risks of a pestilential
climate and the dangers of a wild war; and we hope yet to see
Lieutenant Wauchope rise to that high position in the service which
his talents and abilities so eminently qualify him to fill.'

[Sidenote: Banquet at Portobello]

Lieutenant Wauchope's reply was characteristic of the man.  He was
not quite so much at his ease, or felt he was in his proper place, as
if he had been at the head of his Haussas.  'He thanked the Provost
for the too flattering words in which he had referred to his
services.  He had {49} not deserved such great honour at their hands.
His services as rendered to the State were poor and
insignificant--very much so indeed.  But he felt himself standing on
firmer ground when he remembered that he was an officer in the 42nd
Royal Highlanders.  He recognised in the entertainment a desire to
mark their appreciation of the conduct of the regiment to which he
had the honour to belong.  He had no hesitation in saying that the
42nd deserved well of its country, and he thought that it had added
honour to its history.

'They were all well aware that the Ashantis had invaded our allies'
country, and had perpetrated many horrible cruelties.  Our
representative on the coast sent remonstrances and threats, but these
were all in vain until backed by picked battalions.  Two hundred
marines were first sent out.  They landed at a most unhealthy season,
and most of them died.  Sir Garnet Wolseley then arrived on the
scene, accompanied by British officers, and the result was that the
Ashantis were driven back beyond the river Prah, and within fifteen
miles of Kumasi.  On the 4th February, King Koffee gave instructions
to his bodyguard that any man who ran away would have his head cut
off.  But even King Koffee himself had to run before the British
bullets.  He did not think that the lives that were lost, or the
money that was spent, were given in vain, because it would show those
barbarous nations that the glory of old England was not to be
trampled upon with impunity--that if people would invade our
territory and commit murders and crime, the retribution would be
terrible.  The British lion took a long time to rise.  He was a grand
old animal in his way; but when he did rise, the vengeance would be
speedy.  He believed that the King of Ashanti bitterly regretted the
{50} day that he first invaded the British Protectorate.'  He thanked
the company for the high honour they had done him, and concluded with
a few jocular remarks as to his connection with the town and
district.  He could assure them, he said, that if fortune should
smile on him, and if on a future occasion he should return from some
campaign as a successful soldier, he should be disappointed if he was
not entertained by them in a similar manner.  He was proud of the
district--of the county which gave him birth.  He had often said to
himself that he would spend the latter days of his life in
Portobello.  It might be that yet he would take the position of a
town councillor of the Burgh.  He had no doubt he would make a most
excellent civil magistrate, and be a terror to evil-doers!  In
afterwards replying to the toast of the House of Niddrie, Lieutenant
Wauchope referred to the long connection it had with the district,
and 'expressed the hope that as it had never brought dishonour upon
its name, it would never do so in the future.  So far as in him lay,
he would always try to sustain its honour.'

It is perhaps not wise to attach too much importance to after-dinner
speeches, but there is a ring of sincerity of purpose in these last
words, which in the light of after events gives them an importance
they might not otherwise have.  Wauchope lived up to his ideal
standard of a chivalrous knight, and nobly upheld the honour of his
name.  What Chaucer five hundred years ago wrote of his imaginary
knight, we to-day may say of our real one:

  'He nevere yit no vileinye ne sayde
  In al his lyf, unto no maner wight,
  He was a verray perfight gentil knight.'

{51}

[Sidenote: Father and son]

Wauchope's father was unfortunately unable to be present on so
auspicious an occasion on account of the state of his health, but he
was much gratified by this public recognition of his son's services.
The latter, still in indifferent health, with the slug-wounds in his
chest giving him no little trouble, had, however, a long period of
rest, and was much of the time at Niddrie.  His attention to his
father was very marked while at home--father and son being frequently
seen arm in arm walking through the grounds.




{52}

CHAPTER IV

DEATH OF WAUCHOPE'S FATHER--ORDERED TO
MALTA--REMINISCENCES--RELIGIOUS CONVICTIONS--CYPRUS--APPOINTMENT AS
CIVIL COMMISSIONER OF PAPHO--REMINISCENCES--SIR ROBERT BIDDULPH--THE
SULTAN'S CLAIMS.


In November 1874 Wauchope had the misfortune to lose his father, for
whom, especially since the death of his much-loved mother in the
summer of 1858, he had the closest affection, never permitting any
opportunity to pass without visiting the paternal roof.  Though Mr.
Andrew Wauchope of Niddrie was only fifty-six when he died, he had
for some years been very much of an invalid, and was latterly unable
to take any active part in public business.  He spent much of his
time in and about his house and grounds, taking a considerable
interest in their improvement; but outside he was well known for his
efforts to improve the position of those dependent upon him, and for
his quiet but consistent Christian character.

He attended for several years before his death the Free Church at
Portobello, then under the ministry of the Rev. Robert Henderson
Ireland.  There was no more regular attender of the church than Mr.
Wauchope, who was generally accompanied by one of his daughters, and
by his son Andrew when he happened to be at home, and {53} to the
last the friendship between Mr. Wauchope and his minister was of the
most cordial and kindly nature.  We believe he often expressed his
sense of the benefit he derived from sitting under Mr. Ireland's
ministry.

On Mr. Wauchope's death Lieutenant Wauchope's elder brother, William
John Wauchope, then a Major in the Enniskilling Dragoons, succeeded
to the estates, and in some measure this change altered his
relationship to the old home.  It could not now be the same to him as
formerly, though he was on the most friendly terms with his brother,
and not unfrequently spent some of his time at Niddrie and Yetholm.

There is little doubt that his father's death, coupled with his own
precarious state of health, brought to his mind a deeper conviction
of the seriousness of life, and led to his forming more pronounced
views of religious truth.  But Lieutenant Wauchope, having creditably
won his spurs and fought and bled in his country's service, was not
the man to rest upon his laurels.  He was ready, notwithstanding
former wounds, for further service when the occasion might arise.

[Sidenote: Ordered to Malta]

In November 1875 he again joined his regiment at Malta, where it had
been stationed for nearly a year.  His arrival among his old comrades
was the occasion of a cordial welcome at the Floriana barracks, and
he at once threw himself with spirit into the whole work and drill of
the regiment, taking a lively interest in the welfare of the men and
also of their wives and children.  A brother officer who was then
also a subaltern, and had joined the regiment at Malta a few months
later, says: 'Wauchope was the "Father of the Subalterns" or senior
Lieutenant, and right well he "fathered" newly joined youngsters,
always ready to help them in any way--lending {54} them ponies to
ride and play polo on.  I was always,' he continues, 'associated with
him on the mess committee, and served under him, and what struck one
most about him was the thoroughness with which he tackled whatever
was on hand.'

As regards the rank and file, he was a very brother to many of them,
as the following from one of the colour-sergeants will
show:--'Lieutenant Wauchope was always a favourite with the men, and
in Malta he took a deep interest in them and did much for them,
always manifesting a kindly sympathy towards any who were married
without leave, or who happened to be involved in any trouble which
entailed a deduction from their pay.  On pay-day, while the sergeant
was paying the men, Wauchope would often sit at the table looking on,
and note any who got only a few coppers on account of stoppage for
support of wife and family, or for other reasons.  He would quietly
tell them to wait a little till the company was all paid.  Then he
would speak to each separately, giving them a word of sympathy or
admonition, along with a piece of money, expressing the hope as he
dismissed them that they would try to do better in the future.  This
was so unusual as between officers and men that it had a wonderful
effect upon them.'  Even in their recreations and amusements he
showed an interest, and encouraged them in every possible way.  'He
kept a small yacht while at Malta, and he was in the habit of
inviting the sergeants to an afternoon's enjoyment in cruising about
the harbour for an hour or two.'

[Sidenote: Life in Malta]

With him, care for his men was his first thought; and in commanding
the G company of the 42nd in Floriana barracks, another of his
sergeants observes 'that even in the hot summer afternoons, when the
men were lying {55} down in their beds, he used regularly to sit on
the barrack-room table lecturing them on minor tactics, often, I
fear, more to his own satisfaction than to their edification!'

Of this period of Wauchope's life we have a most interesting sketch
from one who had ample opportunities of seeing his conduct, and
forming a judgment upon the motives and disposition of heart and mind
which governed his actions.  Dr. Wisely, who has for many years been
army chaplain at Malta to the Presbyterian soldiers stationed there,
formed a close and intimate friendship with the young lieutenant on
his arrival in the island.  He saw much of him, and their
acquaintance was renewed on several occasions when Wauchope happened
afterwards to be there.  His opinion is therefore of some value.  'It
is,' says he, 'almost a quarter of a century since I became
acquainted with the late General Wauchope.  He was then about thirty
years of age; and although he had been in the Black Watch for twelve
years or more, and had also for a considerable period been adjutant
of the regiment, he was still only a subaltern, and it seemed quite
uncertain when he would get his company.  Promotion in the 42nd was
at that time very slow, and I asked him whether he had ever thought
of changing into some other regiment, where he might have a better
chance.  His answer was a very emphatic "No."  He wished to remain in
the old corps and take what came.

'Wauchope held some special appointment at home, and his regiment had
been in Malta for several months before he joined them after the
Ashanti war.  He had been severely wounded in that war.  A leaden
slug, fired by one of the savages hidden among the branches of trees,
entered his breast, and it was a marvel he was not killed on the
spot.  He told me he bled like an ox.  His account of {56} how the
blood at last stopped was somewhat curious.  His old colonel, Sir
John M'Leod, came to see him after he was wounded, and on leaving he
presented him with a copy of the Book of Psalms.  Wauchope said that
he began wondering whether "old Jack," as he familiarly called his
commanding officer, whom he greatly venerated, was in the habit of
carrying about copies of the Psalms in his pocket to give to officers
when dangerously wounded, and it struck him in such a ludicrous light
that, after the good colonel was out of sight, he burst into such a
fit of laughing that he could not stop--and that, he said stopped the
bleeding!  Sir John and Wauchope had a great respect for each other.
Wauchope looked up to Sir John with admiration bordering on awe.  The
colonel regarded his lieutenant as a model officer.  He told me that
Wauchope's character commanded universal respect, and that his high
moral tone and the thoroughness with which he discharged all his
duties gave him an influence which was invaluable.

'On his arrival in Malta he was appointed musketry Instructor at
Pembroke Camp.  The men's shooting did not come up to the standard
which it was thought it ought to reach; and one day Sir John said to
me: "Wauchope is making himself perfectly ill with his anxiety about
it.  If he would only be anxious twenty-three hours out of the
twenty-four I would not mind so much, but he is anxious all the
twenty-four hours of the day!"

'At that time, however, Wauchope was anxious not only about his
professional duties, but he was concerned about himself, for he knew
that his life was a most precarious one, scarcely worth a day's
purchase.  The slug which pierced his chest had not been extracted.
It kept moving about, and at any moment might cause death.  {57} This
he knew full well.  He consulted the best surgeons in the island, but
they were unable to do anything.  It was not, I believe, till about a
year afterwards that the slug was at last extracted by an Edinburgh
surgeon.

[Sidenote: The drawn sword]

'During this period of Wauchope's stay in Malta, when there was, as
it were, this drawn sword hanging over his head, although he
maintained a quiet exterior, he felt that there was but a step
between him and death.  I saw a great deal of him then.  He had
brought a letter of introduction to me from his law-agent in
Edinburgh, my old friend the late Mr. Colin Mackenzie, W.S., and from
the first he honoured me with his confidence.  He spoke freely of the
possibility, not to say the probability, that his time on earth might
be short, but he showed no craven fear.  He said he wished to know as
much as he could about the world into which he might soon be
going--that "undiscovered country from whose bourn no traveller
returns."  I have seldom met a man further removed from fanaticism,
and at the same time so full of reverence.  From his earliest days he
seems to have feared God.  He had not, however, escaped from the
doubts and difficulties raised by the sceptical spirit of the age.
He shrank from taking a leap in the dark.  He wanted to be sure that
there was no mistake, and he took the best means of becoming sure.
"If any man will do His will," Christ says, "he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God."  This is what Wauchope did.  He put
the desire to do God's will into every duty which fell to him.  He
followed on to know the Lord, and he came to know the truth of the
Gospel, not only as a truth of faith, but a truth of personal
experience.'

Lieutenant Wauchope was home on furlough more than once during the
period of the 42nd regiment's stay in {58} Malta, extending to nearly
four years, and it was on one of these visits to Edinburgh he was
operated upon successfully, as mentioned by Dr. Wisely.

Though still only a lieutenant, he was appointed to the command of E
company in July 1878, while in Malta.  With a wider range of duties
and greater responsibilities, this appointment gave him much
satisfaction, and he set himself to the task of making E company
_the_ company of the regiment, sparing neither time nor money to
advance its efficiency, and at the same time to add to the comfort
and pleasure of his men.  To be one of Wauchope's company was
considered a high privilege.  Two months afterwards--in September--he
received his full commission as captain.  In addition to the yacht in
which he would give them occasional cruises, we are told by one of
his men that 'the company had a good boating-crew, and at a cost of
about £20 he had the best boat built for them that Malta could
produce.  On one occasion, when they had some races, Captain Wauchope
steered them in a match with the 101st regiment, but not to victory.
Wauchope's boat, named "The Black Watch," was beaten, but he was the
first to declare that the race was lost owing entirely to his bad
steering.'

[Sidenote: Occupation of Malta]

The occupation of the island of Cyprus by Great Britain in 1878 gave
Wauchope a splendid opportunity for the exercise of his talents, not
only as a military man, but in the capacity of a civil administrator
and judge.  The island was taken over from the Turks in July of that
year.  Their government of it for centuries had been a curse to the
people and a curse on the land, and it had lapsed into one of the
forgotten spots of God's earth.  The advent of British rule proved
the beginning of a new era for both its Greek and Turkish population.
Endowed with a healthy {59} climate and a fertile soil, Cyprus--once
so fruitful and prosperous--may yet rank as one of the most
flourishing dependencies of the Crown.  It is full of romance, for
its lovely scenery and relics of the past well entitle it to be
called 'an Enchanted Island.'  With mediæval traditions of its
occupation by the Crusaders, and with its still older classical
reminiscences of the heathen worship of Aphrodite, supplanted by the
early conversion of its people to Christianity through the visit of
St. Paul, St. Mark, and Barnabas, not to speak of its repeated
conquest by Phoenicians, Egyptians, Greeks, Venetians, and Turks,
there is no more interesting island to be found in the Mediterranean.

[Illustration: Captain WAUCHOPE at the Age of 30.]

In July 1878 a regiment of Scottish Highlanders was sent to occupy
this fair island of the Orient in name of the Queen.  The Black Watch
from Malta, in the transport _Himalaya_, landed at Larnaka, and were
distributed at various points for garrison duty, under the direction
of General Sir Garnet Wolseley, as High Commissioner.  Wolseley,
having divided the island into districts, deputed the civil
administration of these to a number of the most skilled of the
military officers of the regiment.  To Lieutenant Wauchope, then
thirty-two years of age, was given, with the title of captain, the
charge of the town and district of Papho--the ancient Paphos, where
the Apostles' journey through the island closed, and where Elymas the
sorcerer was struck blind for a time.  As assistant-commissioner
Wauchope was well supported by Lieutenant A. G. Duff, a young officer
of his company, who furnishes us with some particulars of their
duties and difficulties there.  The post was anything but a sinecure.
He had the superintendence of the revenue under Sir Robert Biddulph,
then Financial Commissioner of the island.  In this important office
he set {60} himself with all the earnestness of his nature to the
correction of abuses, the suppression of crime, and the establishment
of law and order, out of which only can freedom and security be
attained.  We have it on the authority of Mr. F. H. Parker, the
District Judge of Limasol, that 'not only was he a most efficient
governor, but in those days, when Ottoman judges sat in the Daavi
(District) Court, he presided as a just and capable judge.  Though
more than twenty years have elapsed since then, the inhabitants,' he
says, 'irrespective of creed or nationality, still look back on his
civil administration with admiration and deep respect.  Even to this
day his decisions in disputed land or water rights are relied on as
_res judicata_, and he invariably decided these after minute and
personal local inquiries.'  During his two years' service on the
island--from 17th June 1878 till July 1880--Wauchope acquitted
himself with much judgment and discretion, and the honours thrust
upon him were worthily achieved as they were gratefully given.  But
while Captain Wauchope's administration in Cyprus was marked with
justice, it was sometimes of a kind that did not always give
satisfaction.  His punishment, for instance, of heinous crimes was
considered by the natives to be of such severity that a complaint was
lodged with the Colonial Office against some sentences where he had
ordered the delinquents to be flogged.  On inquiry being made of him
by the Colonial Office as to what he had to say in the matter, his
reply was that 'flogging was the only thing for them, as they richly
deserved more than the punishment they had got, and he thought it was
better for them than hanging'!

[Sidenote: Sergeant M'Gaw's funeral]

His duties did not end in military, or administrative, or judicial
service, for sometimes he had even to act as chaplain in cases of
emergency, as the following instance {61} will show.  A day or two
after they landed, Sergeant M'Gaw of the 42nd--who had gallantly won
the Victoria Cross at Amoaful--took ill under the excessive heat and
died.  The regimental chaplain was not present, but Wauchope followed
the funeral with his company, and at the grave, stepping forward as
the body was about to be committed to the dust, feelingly addressed
his men in a few appropriate words of exhortation, and concluded, to
the surprise and gratification of all, with an earnest extempore
prayer.  Tears, we are told by one who witnessed the occurrence, were
in the eyes of many a stalwart soldier that day, and the incident
made a deep impression at the time and was never forgotten by them.
A sequel to Sergeant M'Gaw's funeral may here be mentioned as another
instance of Wauchope's thoughtful care.  Some time afterwards it was
discovered that the Cypriote farmer on whose land the sergeant was
buried, had removed the little wooden head-mark, and not unnaturally
ploughed up the land and destroyed all trace of the grave.  The
Government was asked to take action, but declined to interfere.  So
Wauchope and some others went on a moonlight night, and after taking
measurements from a certain tree, discovered the grave, dug up the
remains, removed them to Kyrenia, and placed them in what is now
known as the Black Watch cemetery.  A pure white marble sarcophagus
now covers Sergeant M'Gaw's grave.

After the long reign of Turkish misrule it will be easily understood
that Commissioner Wauchope and his colleague Lieutenant Duff did not
all at once find things easy.  On the contrary, they found it very
hard work.  The rascality of the natives was as idyllic as innocence.
Murder and theft were so common that they were scarcely considered
culpable, and this in what has been called an {62} 'enchanted
island,' full of every beauty to satisfy the eye, and every fruit to
satisfy the taste.  Even ten years after the occupation by the
British, and notwithstanding all our efforts to restore order and
justice, W. H. Mallock, describing his visit to Cyprus in 1888, says
that 'he found there more crime in proportion to the population than
in any other known country in the world.'  In Nicosia the prisons
were full of persons, male and female, confined for murder, theft,
etc.  'In the country districts,' he says, 'the cause of murders has
generally some connection with sheep-stealing or disputes about
boundaries and water rights, or matters equally simple.  In the towns
the Turkish murders nearly always originate in some ordinary fit of
sombre but sudden passion, and the Greek murders in some half-drunken
brawl.  Curiously enough, a number of these last take place at
weddings.  Wine has flowed; quarrelling has arisen out of laughter;
knives have flashed, and in a second or two one knife has been red
with blood.  Yet amid so much crime there exists among this degraded
people a whimsical simplicity almost justifying a smile.'  One
instance, as given by Mr. Mallock, will suffice to illustrate this.
One of three men implicated in a murder fled to the hut of a
shepherd, and begged to be kept there in hiding.  The shepherd, who
had only a slight acquaintance with the man, asked why he wished to
be hidden.  On this the murderer, more like a child than a man,
explained everything in the most naïve manner possible.  The shepherd
looked grave.  He said that this was a serious matter, and that under
the circumstances his protection would have to be paid for.  The
murderer replied that the booty had not yet been divided; 'I have no
money,' he said, 'but save me and I will steal a sheep for you!'

{63}

[Sidenote: A Cyprian judge]

It was among criminals such as these, and a population with the
vaguest possible notions of morality, that Wauchope had to deal out
justice.  How did he accomplish his task?  His friend and colleague,
now Major Duff, tells us: 'His administration of justice was a
marvel, and astonished both Turks and Greeks.  He would frequently
sit a whole day in the Konak or court-house, dispensing even-handed
justice.  All the evidence had to be taken through an interpreter,
involving much delay, and frequently he sat in this way under high
fever.  I have sometimes taken his temperature to find it at 105°,
but he bore all physical pain without a murmur, and no complaint ever
passed his lips.'  Papho was considered the most lawless district in
the island; and the administration of justice, in both civil and
criminal cases, in the hands of Captain Wauchope and Lieutenant Duff,
with the aid of an interpreter, involved painstaking discretion of no
ordinary kind.  'The Cadi--a Turkish judge--had a seat on the bench
along with them, and his opinion was always taken, though not always
followed.  One incident comes to my memory relating to an execution.
We had passed sentence upon a murderer, but were in a difficulty
about the gallows, and did not know what to do for want of a suitable
rope, but fortunately H.M.S. _Raleigh_ unexpectedly put in an
appearance in the bay, and the bluejackets readily came to our aid in
rigging up a makeshift gallows.  The ceremony, however, was not
marked with complete success, as, at the first effort, the rope
broke; but death had supervened, so that it was of no consequence, as
the operation did not require to be repeated.  There must have been
some flaw in the rope, as it had been previously tried with a very
heavy man's weight.  We never had any difficulty in the
administration of justice.  Wauchope's {64} impartial and thoroughly
sound sense of judgment as between man and man, always stood him well
with clients and malefactors.'

One case came before him which in this connection is worthy of being
recorded.  A Turk of infamous character, who had been guilty of
horrible crimes, but had escaped punishment under the Turkish rule,
was brought before Commissioner Wauchope on a charge of murder.  The
murder was clearly proved, but doubts were entertained whether the
Commissioner would sentence a Mohammedan to be hanged.  No such
instance had ever been known in the island before.  Wauchope did not
flinch.  He pronounced the sentence, and the murderer was publicly
executed.  The Commissioner took the precaution, however, of having a
company of his Royal Highlanders on the ground to see that there
should be no disturbance or any attempt at rescue, and all passed off
peacefully.

[Sidenote: Commissioner at Papho]

Besides the judicial functions of the Commissioner of Papho, there
were the fiscal duties of Government.  Taxes had to be collected, and
these, with the relative duties of finance and the management of the
post office, were entirely under the personal control of Wauchope and
his colleague.  The latter service alone must have involved
considerable labour.  Besides this, they had at Papho one company of
the 42nd, camped some little distance out of the town, but near
enough to be readily available when required.  So busy were they kept
with these varied onerous duties, that Wauchope and his friend,
frequently working at high pressure, had few opportunities for
recreation.  But notwithstanding the pressing requirements of the
moment, and the somewhat circumscribed social aspect of the place,
they were on the best of terms with some of the leading native
gentry: the Greek bishop {65} was particularly friendly, and they
often dined with him at his palace.  A worthy old fellow he appears
to have been, who could enjoy a good dinner with a prime bottle of
Cyprus wine.  In recognition of his great kindness to them Major Duff
mentions that they 'gave him in return such a banquet on St. Andrew's
night as seemed to gladden his soul.'

Of amusements, or anything in the way of English sports, there were
few or none, even had time permitted.  Still, they would not have
been British if they had not introduced among the natives some sports
from the old country.  They accordingly started pony races for the
zaptiehs or police of the district.  'Our chief difficulty,' says
Major Duff, 'was to get the Turks and Greeks to run together in the
same coach, and for this difficult task Wauchope was eminently
qualified, as, in addition to all his many sterling attributes, must
be added that of being a student of human nature, without which he
never would have been the leader of men he unquestionably was.'

So much did Captain Wauchope accomplish during his term of office at
Papho, that Dr. Wisely informs us 'the inhabitants looked on him as
an angel from heaven--and well they might, when they contrasted his
righteous rule with the wretched rule of the Turkish officials who
had tyrannised over them.  Yet Wauchope was by no means an easy-going
ruler.  He investigated with the greatest patience every case that
was brought before him, and spared himself no pains to get at the
truth.  This made such an impression upon the Turks, as well as upon
the Greek-speaking community, that all classes alike respected him,
and when the time came for the Commissioner to retire from office,
there was a universal desire expressed that he might be retained.'

{66}

We have been favoured with similar testimony from Sir Robert
Biddulph, sometime High Commissioner of Cyprus, lately Governor of
Gibraltar, who informs us that 'in carrying out his duties Captain
Wauchope showed much administrative ability, as well as great tact
and judgment in dealing with the inhabitants.  This enabled him to
steer a clear course through the political agitation which broke out
in Cyprus early in 1879, and which had many adherents in Papho.  When
Sir Garnet Wolseley left the island at short notice in May 1879 in
order to command the troops in Natal and Zululand, his departure,
coinciding with the attacks made in Parliament on the Cyprus
administration, caused several of the civil commissioners to send in
their resignations.'  Colonel Biddulph, who had been sent from Cyprus
to Constantinople in March 1879 to negotiate with the Porte
concerning the 'tribute,' was in June following instructed by the
Home Government to return and assume the government of the island as
High Commissioner.  On his arrival he was met by Captain Wauchope,
who had come with several of the other commissioners to wish him
good-bye before leaving the island.  Sir Robert at once realised the
gravity of the situation.  'I told them,' says he, 'that I could not
consent to their leaving all together at this crisis, and Wauchope
willingly consented to remain for, at all events, some months longer.
In September I went home for two months on private affairs, and
Wauchope then went home with me, having resigned his appointment with
my consent.'

[Sidenote: The Sultan's claims]

In the interval, certain questions as to personal claims by the
Sultan to property in Cyprus were presented to the British
Government, and it was decided to appoint a qualified British
delegate to investigate these claims on {67} the spot.  On the
recommendation of Sir Robert Biddulph, Lord Salisbury appointed
Captain Wauchope for this somewhat difficult duty, and he and Sir
Robert returned to Cyprus together in November of the same year.  In
his official capacity Wauchope explored the whole of Cyprus, making
full inquiries wherever he went as to the properties alleged to
belong to the Sultan, and gathering much information as to the
condition of the people in the rural districts, and the state of
agriculture generally.

'The investigation of the Sultan's claims,' says Sir Robert Biddulph,
'occupied several months, during which time Captain Wauchope again
displayed great tact and judgment in this very delicate matter, and
maintained at the same time very friendly relations with the Turkish
officer who was sent by the Sultan to support his claims.  This was
the more remarkable, because every one of the Sultan's claims was
rejected.'

The Government recognised the thoroughness with which Captain
Wauchope had accomplished his task, by conferring upon him,
immediately on his return home in August 1880, the Order of St.
Michael and St. George.




{68}

CHAPTER V

WAR IN SOUTH AFRICA--ARABI PASHA'S REBELLION IN
EGYPT--TEL-EL-KEBIR--MARRIAGE--LIFE IN CAIRO.


Shortly after Captain Wauchope's return home from Cyprus another
opportunity for foreign service presented itself in South Africa, and
he lost no time in offering himself to the War Office.  He was
accepted for staff duty, and received a commission to go out at once.
So limited was the time given him for preparation that he had not
even an opportunity to go to Aldershot, where his baggage was lying,
to make up his kit, but he telegraphed from London to the
quartermaster of the regiment--Captain Forbes--to throw him in a
small kit into a bullock-trunk and forward it to Southampton at once,
as he was off to South Africa next day.

[Sidenote: The Transvaal]

The country had drifted almost unconsciously into a trouble which has
since cost so much in loss of life and treasure.  The South African
Republic, or the Transvaal, was founded some sixty or seventy years
ago by Boer farmers from Cape Colony, who, being dissatisfied with
British rule and its interference with them and their peculiar
notions as to slavery, sought to establish an independent state for
themselves where they might without hindrance carry out their ideas
as they pleased.  They, in fact, sought liberty {69} to make the
natives their slaves.  Conflicts were, of course, the natural outcome
of their attempts to acquire the land beyond the Vaal; but
notwithstanding this, the new settlers in 1840 were so far
established in possession, and their numbers had so much increased,
that they formed themselves into a Republic for mutual protection.
At that time the possibilities of the future importance of this part
of South Africa, or indeed of our colonies there, were not
sufficiently realised by either our Government or our people at home.
Neither the Transvaal Republic nor the Boers seemed to be any concern
of ours.  It was left to a few Scotch missionaries such as Moffat,
Livingstone, Stewart, and Mackenzie to make these known, and to
endeavour to educate and civilise the degraded natives in the science
of social life and in the truths of Christianity.  In this effort
they met from the first the virulent opposition of the Boer settlers,
who neither wanted the natives to be educated nor to be Christianised.

Acts of oppression naturally brought their own retribution.  The
natives rose against their oppressors; feuds, murders, and thefts
were acts of daily occurrence, until at last the infant Republic
became so involved in native wars and internal troubles, that with a
view to restore peace and order and to prevent anarchy and bankruptcy
from spreading into Cape Colony, the British Government was
constrained to interfere.  In this intervention many of the Boers
cordially acquiesced, and welcomed the protection of our troops, the
more so that the financial difficulties of their independent action
were in a measure cleared away.  On the other hand there was a strong
party among them who, in spite of mismanagement and debt, thought
they could carry on a free Republican Government.  The security of
the British colonies was, however, of {70} paramount importance, and
it was deemed advisable in their interest as well as in the interest
of the Transvaal Boers themselves that the Transvaal should have the
benefit of British protection.  Accordingly its annexation to the
British Crown was in 1877 proclaimed by Sir Theophilus Shepstone,
followed by the appointment of Sir W. Owen Lanyon as British
Administrator.  This necessary step by no means pleased the Boer
faction who had attempted to rule, and they did not cease to agitate
for the restoration of the old order of things, bad as these were.
For a time English money and English enterprise worked wonders:
markets were created for produce, and land rose in value.

In December 1880, however, a majority of the Boers took up arms
against the British authority.  They invested towns held by Imperial
troops, and surprised a detachment on the march.  The situation was
becoming critical.  The Government, which at the time was deeply
engrossed in other matters, did not sufficiently realise the gravity
of the situation, for although troops were at once despatched to the
assistance of those at the Cape, these were insufficient, and arrived
too late to be of service.  The Boers, ever on the alert, had seized
the passes of the Drakensberg Mountains, and had strongly fortified
themselves at Laing's Nek.  Here they were attacked by Sir G. P.
Colley, but without success.  He was defeated with considerable loss,
and shortly afterwards, attempting to check the enemy at Majuba Hill
with a small force of six hundred men, he was again defeated with
loss and was himself killed in the action.

[Sidenote: The Boer Treaty of 1881]

Immediately on receipt of this news Mr. Gladstone's Government gave
instructions for an armistice in order to see if satisfactory terms
could not be arranged for the {71} restoration of peace.  After a
month's negotiation a treaty was made giving the Transvaal
self-government in internal matters, but reserving all rights
connected with foreign affairs, Great Britain to be recognised as the
Suzerain, including the right to move Imperial troops through the
country in time of war.

This restoration of independence to the Boers was viewed both at home
and in Cape Colony not only with grave suspicion and distrust, but
with high indignation; and so strong was this feeling against the
home Government that in a great popular demonstration at Cape Town
the effigy of Mr. Gladstone, the Prime Minister, was publicly burned,
and the British lion was caricatured, while many English residents in
Pretoria and other towns left the country rather than remain under
the oligarchical government of the Boers.  So ended this part of the
Transvaal drama.

The action of the British Government was at the time attributed to
various motives.  By some it was considered the magnanimous action of
a strong power, willing to help a weak but struggling state in its
efforts at self-government; by others it has been described as a
pusillanimous shrinking from a stern duty which it owed to its
colonies around the Transvaal.  President Brand declared the treaty
to be 'in his opinion the noblest act England has ever done'; but the
Boers themselves considered the peace as the result of their own
efforts and of Britain's fear to prosecute the war.  The after
results have been most calamitous, and go to show the folly of not
facing and overcoming the beginnings of a corrupt system.

Captain Wauchope returned on the conclusion of peace in the summer of
1881, having been only a few months abroad, and without engaging in
active service.  He was chiefly employed on the line of communication
as one of {72} the staff.  His return home was accompanied with
anything but feelings of respect for the Government which had so
ingloriously stopped short in their work--a feeling very generally
shared by the officers and men.  Some years afterwards, when alluding
to this episode in his life at a meeting in Edinburgh, he said of
it:--'I was in the Transvaal during those terrible times in 1881 when
we suffered the terrible disgrace from which all our after-troubles
there arose.  It was the vacillation and weakness and change of
policy that caused all the trouble then.'

But while in one part of Africa a temporary peace had been patched
up, in another part of that great continent, and that the most
ancient, events were in the beginning of 1882 hastening to a rupture
which was destined to open up a fresh field for the active military
genius of young Wauchope.  Egypt, the land of the Pharaohs, and in
some respects the cradle of European culture, which had long been
oppressed by Turkish tyranny, was showing signs of vitality, and was
recognised as still a country capable of great resources, and having
considerable commercial importance.  The opening of the Suez Canal
had much to do with this; and Britain having a large stake in the
Canal as a means of communication with her Eastern possessions, was
naturally interested in the well-being of the country through which
it passed.  Nominally a viceroy of the Sultan of Turkey, the Khedive
of Egypt ruled despotically, and did little for the people he ruled.
Discontent was general; and to screen themselves, those in authority
endeavoured to create a feeling of antipathy against the Europeans
residing and trading in Egypt.  A party of military adventurers,
headed by Arabi Pasha, and secretly abetted by the Sultan of Turkey,
had seized the reins of government, and endeavoured, with the aid of
the army, {73} to drive all Europeans out of Egypt, and secure the
control of foreign traffic through the Suez Canal to their own
advantage.  Arabi commenced the erection of forts at Alexandria, to
command the harbour.  This and other war-like preparations were made
in defiance, it was said, of the authority of the Khedive, who was
merely a puppet in Arabi's hands.

[Sidenote: Bombardment of Alexandria]

On the 11th June 1882 a large body of Arabs made a murderous attack
on the European residents in Alexandria, and so serious was the
matter considered that a week or two after, the Ambassadors of the
Great Powers met in conference at Constantinople to take the crisis
under review.  As no redress was forthcoming, Admiral Sir Beauchamp
Seymour, commander of the British fleet in Egyptian waters, having
ascertained that work on the new fortifications at Alexandria was
being continued, notwithstanding promises made that all such
operations would be suspended, sent to Arabi Pasha, who was nominally
the Egyptian minister of war, an ultimatum that unless the work
ceased immediately the fleet would open fire upon the forts.  The
reply was a denial that any such work was being carried on.  Three
days afterwards the Admiral discovered that his ultimatum was treated
with contempt, and that guns bearing upon the harbour had been
mounted since the date of his message.  He at once prepared a
proclamation calling upon the Egyptian authorities to surrender the
fortifications within twelve hours, otherwise they would be
demolished by the fleet.  On the 11th July the bombardment commenced,
and nearly the whole of the fortifications were soon laid in ruins.
Next day hostilities were resumed, but, on a flag of truce being
hoisted, the Admiral ordered firing to cease.  On the morning of the
13th it was found that, under cover of the flag of truce, {74} the
Egyptian troops, headed by Arabi Pasha, had evacuated Alexandria,
leaving it to be pillaged and fired by a riotous mob of Arabs, who
massacred a large number of Europeans.  To protect life, and save the
place from total destruction, Admiral Seymour landed a force of
seamen and marines, who kept the city in order until the arrival of
British troops a few days afterwards.

In the course of the following fortnight a force of about 16,000
occupied Alexandria, Ramleh, and the delta of the Nile, under the
command of Sir Garnet Wolseley.  Meantime Arabi Pasha had occupied
Cairo, which was strongly fortified, while he had formidable
entrenched camps some miles south of Ramleh, and also at Port Said
and Ismailia on the Suez Canal, and at Kassassin and Tel-el-Kebir, on
the sweet-water canal route between Ismailia and Cairo.

Throughout the whole business the authority of the Khedive was not
only ignored, but remonstrances from foreign powers were of no
effect.  Arabi was determined to make himself ruler of Egypt, and to
assert his position by force of arms.  His formal dismissal as
Minister of War, on 22nd July, was the last weak attempt by the
Khedive to maintain his sovereign authority.  But Arabi paid no
attention to it, and continued his warlike preparations.  His
position at Kafr-dawar was strategically a strong one, for he was
entrenched there at a point where the isthmus, running inland between
Lake Medieh and Lake Mareotis, is only about four miles broad.  He
thus commanded both the Mahmoudieh Canal and the railway to Cairo,
which ran past his camp.  Arabi's intention was to hold his own at
this position till the annual rise of the Nile was at its fullest in
August, when he counted upon being able to flood the country, and
seriously impede hostile operations against him.

{75}

The rising had now assumed all the character of an organised
rebellion, and was a standing menace to British commerce passing
through the Suez Canal; and as the crisis came to be more clearly
realised in this country, further relays of troops were despatched.
In the subsequent operations against Arabi the Black Watch took a
prominent part.  After its return from Cyprus and Gibraltar in 1879,
the regiment was brigaded for a time at Aldershot.  It was then
located partly at Maryhill barracks, near Glasgow, and at Edinburgh
Castle, under the command of Colonel R. K. Bayly.  Captain Wauchope
served at Maryhill from May 1881 till August 1882.

[Sidenote: The 42nd leaving Edinburgh]

On the outbreak of hostilities in Egypt the regiment, which was then
about 800 strong, received orders to embark for the East.  The
Maryhill contingent, in which he commanded the E Company, left by
train for Edinburgh on the 4th August 1882, and arrived in the
capital amidst much enthusiasm.  After two days in Edinburgh Castle,
the whole regiment was entrained for London on the 6th August, their
send-off from the city being one of the most extraordinary ever
witnessed.  Wauchope himself, ten years afterwards, at a meeting of
the old members of the Black Watch in Glasgow, when he had become
Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment, said 'he would never forget the
scene.'  'He had of late,' he said, 'seen great excitement in the
political world, he had seen political leaders received in Edinburgh
(referring to Mr. Gladstone and the Midlothian election of 1892), and
no doubt at times there had been a pretty brave show, but the
people's heart never went out to these leaders as it went out to the
42nd when they were leaving Edinburgh Castle for active service in
Egypt in 1882.  It seemed to him as if every man and woman in
Edinburgh was out to see {76} them off.  He would never forget that
scene of enthusiasm and farewell, and he felt convinced that it
affected the whole regiment, more than the eye could see or words
could express.  On the lips of many a brave man before that campaign
was over, the last words had been "Scotland for ever," and he had no
doubt their last thoughts were of their homes and native country.'

Having embarked at Gravesend in the transport _Nepaul_, Wauchope,
with his regiment, landed at Alexandria on the 20th August, and
proceeded to Ramleh, where they formed a part of the Highland Brigade
under General Sir Archibald Alison.  Here Wauchope very soon found
his field of action in more than one engagement, and had one or two
hairbreadth escapes.  On one occasion a body of the rebels held a
portion of the city, from which they were to be dislodged.  Wauchope
got the order to clear the streets.  Coming to a house, from every
window of which rifles were pointed, he halted his men, but only for
a moment.  Sword in hand, the captain rushed in, followed by his men.
A rifle was pointed full at him, and but for the presence of mind of
one of his followers, it would have ended his career.  Dashing in
front of his officer, the soldier threw up the rebel's rifle just as
he fired, the bullet passing through Wauchope's helmet.

[Sidenote: Tel-el-Kebir]

The occupation of the Canal and the various ports upon its banks were
important steps in Sir Garnet Wolseley's endeavour to secure Zagazig,
some forty-five miles from Ismailia, the key to the railway system of
Egypt.  Arabi had also realised its importance, and in order to
retain it at all hazards and to prevent the British advance in that
direction, had strongly fortified himself at Tel-el-Kebir, about
fifteen miles eastward.

On the 20th August, Port Said, Kantara, Ismailia, and {77} the Suez
Canal were taken possession of by the British.  A few days after, a
determined stand was made by the Egyptian army, about 10,000 strong,
a few miles from Ismailia, but they were utterly defeated by Sir
Garnet Wolseley, who was now reinforced by the Highland Brigade.

This was followed up by a renewed attack on the British position at
Kassassin Lock on the Ismailia Canal three days later, when the
Egyptians were again repulsed with great loss.

On the evening of the 12th September, the British army at Kassassin
Lock struck camp.  It had been well reinforced, and counted 15,000
men in cavalry, infantry, and artillery, and was now in a position to
attack Arabi in his stronghold at Tel-el-Kebir.  On the verge of a
broad, dreary desert, with lines of entrenchments and redoubts well
mounted with guns, and held by a large force, no better position, it
is said, could have been chosen for offering resistance to any army
approaching the Delta, or the capital of Egypt, from the Suez Canal.

After an all-night march, Sir Garnet Wolseley found himself within
striking distance of the enemy's trenches before the first streaks of
dawn appeared on the eastern sky.  The Egyptians were taken by
surprise, but the alarm once given, they sprang to their feet to face
the attack; and immediately, along the whole front of their line of
defence, was poured upon our troops a fierce artillery and rifle
fire, which, however, was so ill directed that it did no great harm.
With the utmost coolness, the British were formed for the assault.
The Highland Brigade in the centre, with bayonets fixed, was
supported by cavalry on both flanks With a loud cheer the Highlanders
stormed the entrenchments, driving everything before them.  The
struggle was {78} short but decisive, not more than twenty minutes
elapsing between the first onset on the trenches and the capture of
the main or inner fortress.  The odds were as two to one--26,000
Egyptians to 13,000 British--but the zeal and soldierly qualities of
our men, with the confidence they had in their leaders, proved the
mettle of which our military are made.  Where all did well, it seems
invidious to distinguish.  But of this fine force--perhaps the finest
ever seen in Egypt--it was generally admitted that to the Highland
Brigade and the Royal Irish Rifles special honour was due.  This
important engagement, in which forty guns were captured, 2000
Egyptians fell, and 3000 were taken prisoners, opened the way to
Cairo.

Through all the campaign, Captain Wauchope, with the E Company of the
42nd, had bravely borne his share of the toil and dangers of the
situation.  At Tel-el-Kebir, he was among the first to enter the
enemy's trenches sword in hand.  The encounter was a fierce one while
it lasted, and it was a marvel how he escaped injury in such a mêlée.
But though the impetuosity of the charge bore down all before it,
when the fight was over, it was found that no less than 200 of his
men had fallen.

[Sidenote: After Tel-el-Kebir]

Wauchope's first care was to see that the wounded were attended to,
for his interest in his men was ever uppermost in his mind.  He liked
to treat them as brothers as well as subordinates, sharing with them
the roughest work and the greatest dangers; and now particularly,
when many of them were bruised and bleeding, he had all a woman's
sympathy, and did his best to alleviate their sufferings.  He went
carefully over the ground after the battle, searching out from among
the dead such of his men who might be alive, relieving some with a
draught of water from his bottle, and seeing that they were removed
to shelter, where they could {79} be surgically attended to; in some
cases, tenderly helping to carry them himself off the field.  Such
scenes always filled him with sadness, as they did the heart of
Wellington, who was wont to say: 'Take my word for it, if you had
seen but one day of war, you would pray to Almighty God that you
might never see such a thing again.'  The horrors of war make most
brave natures shudder.

Immediately after the capture of Arabi's camp at Tel-el-Kebir, at the
next halting-stage in the army's progress to Cairo, the 42nd was
marched into the square of a cavalry barracks to wait for a train
being made to enable them to follow the retreating enemy to
Zagazig--an important railway junction on the way.  They were in very
rough quarters, but were glad to get any sort of shelter from the
scorching sun.  One of the staff-sergeants, wearied out and oppressed
with heat, stumbled into a room which, unknown to him, happened to be
occupied by Captain Wauchope and his subordinate officer, Lieutenant
Duff.  'As I attempted to withdraw--for I had entered not knowing
they were there'--said the sergeant, describing the occurrence,
'Captain Wauchope at once called out in a kindly voice, "Come in,
Pinkney, come in and sit down, you have as much right to be here as
we have."'

But though this was so, Pinkney, who was not one of his men, did not
fare so well on another occasion when his presence stood in the way
of the convenience of the men of his company, Captain Wauchope having
then no hesitation in leaving him to shift for himself.  We give the
story in the sergeant's own words:--'Shortly after this, we were
marched down to the railway and literally packed into trucks.  I
being a staff-sergeant, and in a sense "nobody's child," crawled into
one marked E.  It was Wauchope's, and as all his men could not find
room, I was ignominiously {80} ordered out by the same gallant
gentleman!  We were very good friends, but as I did not belong to his
company, he could not allow me to interfere with their comfort!'

Sergeant Pinkney also relates an incident of the same day
illustrating Wauchope's thoughts on the inhumanity of war.  'We were
all sitting together on the mud floor of the room where we were
sheltering, discussing the events of the morning.  "Andy," as we all
loved to call our captain, had not, for a wonder, been wounded, but a
Remington bullet through the scabbard of his sword had bent it nearly
double, so that he could not return the weapon.  Another bullet
through his helmet had disarranged the pugaree and heckle, of which
he was so proud.  He drew my attention as armourer to the condition
of his scabbard, and I took it into my hand and broke it across my
knee, so that he could sheath his sword, though some eight inches of
the blood-stained blade were exposed.  While I was next adjusting his
pugaree, he suddenly exclaimed, "I say, Duff, what brutes we men
are."  We were silent for a minute, and then seeing our surprised
look, as we stopped our work, he continued, "Do you know, I felt this
morning just as if I was on the moors, and for a while I was quite as
anxious to make a good bag; man, Duff, we are terrible brutes, after
all!"'

[Illustration: Niddrie Marischal, Back View]

The same day Wauchope's regiment proceeded to within a few miles of
Zagazig, reaching that place in the morning of the 14th September.
Here they seized the railway stock, and went on to Belbeis, an
important junction on the edge of the desert.  There they remained
under the utmost discomfort, without tents and without equipage,
until the 23rd September, when they moved forward to Ghezireh, near
to Cairo, and were again quartered with the Highland Brigade, under
Lieut.-General Sir E. Hamley.

{81}

The subsequent occupation of Cairo, the arrest and banishment of
Arabi Pasha, and the restoration of the Khedive under British
protection, are matters of history.  The war was closed, but still
much required to be done to restore order and peace, and so the
expeditionary force became an army of occupation.

Captain Wauchope, after a few weeks' encampment at Ghezireh, on the
west bank of the Nile, was moved with his regiment into Kass-el-Nil
barracks, where they were to be quartered for the winter.  A time of
peace succeeded a time of sharp fighting.  But whether fighting or at
peace, Wauchope gave himself no rest.  His military duties might be
heavy enough, but his self-imposed exertions in looking after the
wounded and the sick were varied by efforts to find amusement and
recreation for those who were well.

For his services in this campaign, Captain Wauchope received the
medal with clasp, and the Khedive's Star, as the public recognition
of the British and Egyptian Governments.

[Sidenote: Return to Scotland]

His stay in Egypt was unexpectedly interrupted by the serious illness
of his elder brother, Major William Wauchope, which eventually
resulted in his death on the 28th November 1882.  Returning home a
few weeks before that sad event, he was fortunately enabled to look
after the settlement of family affairs and the future management of
the estates.

The death of his brother without issue made a considerable change in
his position, and when he arrived at Niddrie early in December, he
was welcomed as the new laird with every expression of goodwill.
Though he had been little about the old place for years, the tenants
and servants had warm recollections of 'Andy' as a good, kind, genial
soul, and they all hoped that he might now {82} return to occupy the
ancestral home, and settle down among 'his ain folk.'

As a pledge that such a consummation might be looked for in the near
future, and taking advantage of his casual visit home, he was married
on the 9th of December to Miss Elythea Ruth Erskine, second daughter
of Sir Thomas Erskine of Cambo, Fife, to whom he had for some time
been engaged.

The wedding had been arranged to be celebrated at Cambo in a quiet
way, as our informant said, 'without any fuss'; but though this was
so, Captain Wauchope found to some extent the adage verified, that
'the course of true love never did run smooth.'  In arranging for his
marriage in the stormy month of December, he did not at all events
lay his account with the elements.  These did their best to frustrate
the happy event.

[Sidenote: Marriage]

Cambo is situated two or three miles distant from Fife Ness, the
extreme eastern point of the county of Fife.  It is now easily
accessible by the railway skirting the northern shore of the Firth of
Forth, connecting Thornton Junction and St. Andrews, by way of
Anstruther and Crail.  But at that time the railway was not completed
further than Anstruther on the one side and St. Andrews on the other,
and Cambo was about eight or nine miles from either place.  Starting
from Edinburgh on the morning of the day fixed for the wedding,
Captain Wauchope should easily have arrived at Cambo in the forenoon,
but a protracted snowstorm of several days had completely blocked
railways and roads.  Thinking he would be more likely to get a
conveyance to carry him to his destination if he went by St. Andrews,
he took that instead of the route to Anstruther; but on arriving at
that ancient city, he was chagrined to find that the roads were so
completely {83} blocked with snow that no one would venture the
journey for him.  Taking his luggage to the Royal Hotel, he tried all
his persuasive powers with Mr. Davidson, the genial host, to get a
carriage, or even a dogcart, ready for him without delay.  But the
storm still raged, and he was told that the roads were quite
impassable either for driving or riding, and he would require to
remain where he was for the night.  'But,' said the would-be and now
desperate Benedict, 'I _must_ get to Cambo, as I am to be married
to-night.'  The hotelkeeper assured him that in the circumstances it
was impossible, but promised to do the best he could for him the next
morning if the weather moderated.  At length, convinced that nothing
more could be done, the disappointed swain was obliged to bow to the
inevitable, and eat his solitary dinner with what resignation he
could command.  It was a severe trial of patience, but there was
nothing else for it, and so he remained overnight in the friendly
shelter of the 'Royal,' in the hope that he might get release the
following day.  Sir Thomas Erskine, meanwhile, expecting the
bridegroom to come by way of Anstruther, where the roads happened not
to be so badly blocked, had sent a carriage with the young bride to
meet him there.  But no Wauchope appeared, and the young lady had to
return home without tidings of her lover.  The disappointment of all
may be better imagined than described, and the wedding was of course
postponed _sine die_.  The following morning the storm had somewhat
abated, but the snow-drift still lay deep on the roads, making them
quite impassable for wheeled vehicles.  Davidson, true to his word,
however, gave him the best horse in his stable, repacked his luggage
in carpet-bags slung across the back of another, and with a groom in
attendance Wauchope courageously faced the elements to {84} meet his
bride.  It was a toilsome business, and not without danger.  At
Browhill, some two miles from St. Andrews, the block was so deep that
they were compelled to make a detour, or 'a flank movement,' as he
afterwards described it, across the fields, but in doing so they came
to grief.  The horse which Wauchope rode stumbled and fell through
the accumulated snow into a deep ditch, where it was well-nigh
smothered, and the combined efforts of Wauchope and groom utterly
failed to extricate the poor animal.  At length assistance was
procured, a number of farm servants from the neighbourhood giving
willing help, and after a good deal of exertion it was at length got
out, while the groom, wiping the perspiration from his brow,
declared, 'This is terrible work, captain; it's worse than Egypt
yet!'  The remainder of the nine-mile journey was completed in
safety.  Love had triumphed.  A warm welcome greeted the belated
bridegroom at Cambo, and though 'one day after date,' the marriage
cheque was duly honoured!

The hopes of his friends at home that he might now give up active
service, and become a local county magnate, were not, however, to be
realised.  Captain Wauchope, accompanied by his young wife, returned
to Egypt a few weeks after their marriage, to take up his military
duties with the Black Watch; and there, in the quaint old Oriental
city of Cairo, they spent together the first and, alas, the last year
of their married life.

[Sidenote: Life in Cairo]

Perhaps no other town under the sun has so many different
characteristics as Cairo, and certainly few places afford such strong
contrasts.  It is at one and the same time an official capital, a
city of immemorial antiquity, a garrison town, a health resort, an
Oriental centre, and the Paris of the Dark Continent.  Half the
hidden charm of {85} Cairo and its surroundings, it has been said,
consists of the strongly incongruous sights that meet an observant
eye: the modern woman leaning on her bicycle, and steadfastly looking
at the unchanging eyes of the Sphinx, or a laughing party of officers
and Americans in the shadow of the Great Pyramid, or among the tombs
of the caliphs, its Oriental bazaar crowded with British soldiers and
sailors: an old world and a new.  Chief among the attractions of
Cairo is its climate, combining almost continuous sunshine,
comparative warmth, and an air of pure and tonic qualities.

Mrs. Wauchope resided during these months at the Grand Hotel, within
comparatively easy distance of Kass-el-Nil barracks, where the
captain's daily duties lay, and amid new surroundings found much to
interest her, while she materially helped him in his work among the
men of his regiment.

Unfortunately, though the climate as a rule is excellent during the
greater part of the year, sanitary arrangements and modes of living
were not then, whatever they may be now, such as to prevent the evils
to which most Eastern cities are subject.  Cholera, one of the
scourges of the East, broke out in Cairo among the Copts in the
summer of 1883, and, spreading among the better classes of society,
even found its way among the British soldiers.  Their removal from
Cairo for a time was considered absolutely necessary; but before this
could be effected, the Black Watch had suffered considerably from the
epidemic.  As soon as possible, however, cholera-camps were formed at
Suez in July, where the greater part of the regiment remained till
the beginning of September.  During this time Captain Wauchope, with
the rank of brigade-major, was left in charge of the Kass-el-Nil {86}
barracks with a small detachment; and surrounded as they were with an
epidemic which was then cutting down hundreds of poor natives,
without adequate means of relieving the distress, he was much moved
by what he saw, and did his utmost to help.  His first care was of
course for the soldiers under his command.  They did not altogether
escape, and in a number of cases that occurred he was assiduous in
his attention.  Regardless of danger to himself, he would go back and
forward between the hospital and the barracks, giving all the comfort
and material assistance that were required.

But it was not merely in his co-operation with medical men and nurses
that Wauchope's aid was given: he was a valued co-worker with the
chaplain, assisting him in visiting and addressing meetings.  The
Rev. John Mactaggart, who was then acting with the 42nd in Egypt,
says, 'He was always ready to aid me, and willingly responded to any
reasonable request for money on behalf of the men, such as in helping
to defray expenses incurred in holding social, temperance, or
religious meetings.'  'I remember,' he continues, 'in the summer of
1883, the cholera, after raging for weeks among the native
population, attacked the British troops.  As a precautionary measure,
these were dispersed and located at considerable distances from
Cairo, the Black Watch being sent to the brackish lake near Suez.
Captain Wauchope's sympathetic nature was deeply stirred by the many
sad sights around him in Cairo, where he remained through it all with
a small company of the regiment.  Two of his men were stricken down,
one immediately after the other, with the fell disease, and not being
able myself to attend to them at once, he was full of anxiety about
them, and could not rest till he got me to see them at the barracks,
quite heedless of danger to himself.'

{87}

To many a poor fellow he was throughout all this trying time a friend
indeed, counselling, helping, and encouraging wherever he had the
opportunity.

At the evening voluntary meetings in the barracks, too, he frequently
took a part with the chaplain in the religious services.  His
consistent manly conduct and the quiet, unobtrusive profession of his
faith at this time, not only endeared him to many, but gave him a
wonderful influence for good which it is difficult fully to estimate.

[Sidenote: A Cairo mob]

Every one has his own characteristic: Wauchope's was consideration
for his men.  'Years ago,' says a friend, 'I was in the street in
Cairo with him, when there approached us a bareheaded Highlander,
running for his life, and pursued by a crowd of Arabs armed with
sticks.  Captain Wauchope halted the fugitive, turned about, ordered
him to fall in in front, and thus we marched to the barracks, the mob
howling behind.  The Captain handed the man over to the sergeant of
the guard, and notified his intention of giving evidence in the
orderly-room next morning.  A few days later I was to meet the
Captain at the club and take a drive with him.  On arrival there, I
found a note directing me to come to the hospital.  The orderly led
me to a ward, but I could see no Captain.  I interviewed the orderly
again, and he told me to go to the far end and I would find him.
There, on the bed of his colour-sergeant, retailing the day's news,
sat the officer commanding his company.  On my approach, with a
cheery adieu and a promise to come back again on the morrow, Wauchope
rose and went for his drive.'

Mrs. Wauchope was sent home in the summer of 1883, as it was not
considered safe for her to remain in Cairo, and she was joined by the
Captain in November.  They took up their residence at Niddrie for six
weeks, afterwards going to Cambo on {88} a visit.  Towards the end of
January they proceeded to London, where Mrs. Wauchope gave birth to
twins--both boys.  The joy of this event was, however, speedily
followed a few days after, on the 3rd February, by the death of Mrs.
Wauchope.

It was a terrible blow to the Captain, and though he bowed
submissively to the will of God, he none the less felt his loss
keenly, and for a time was inconsolable.

The children were taken to Cambo, where, under the charge of Lady
Erskine, they were tenderly nursed and cared for, while Wauchope
himself sought in renewed activity to forget, if possible, the misery
of his bereavement.  When they were three years old both the children
unfortunately caught scarlet fever.  One, a specially promising
child, died, and the other was left a hopeless invalid.




{89}

CHAPTER VI

THE EASTERN SOUDAN--BATTLE OF EL-TEB--ATTEMPT TO RELIEVE GENERAL
GORDON--ASCENT OF THE NILE--THE WHALE-BOATS--BATTLE OF
KIRBEKAN--RETURN TO CAIRO--MALTA--GIBRALTAR.


Though peace had been restored to Egypt by our arms, and security of
life and property was being established and upheld by the presence in
the country of the army of occupation, new troubles were brewing in
the upper waters of the Nile.  General Gordon, as the representative
of the Khedive in the far-away capital of the Soudan province of
Upper Egypt, was endeavouring to maintain law and order in the midst
of turbulent tribes of wild Arabs.  Disaffection and rebellion
against Egyptian authority broke out on all sides, and the first
murmurings were heard of a new power emerging out of the African
darkness, threatening to overwhelm and sweep before its fanatical
sword every evidence of modern civilisation.  The rise of the Mahdi
as a religious and political force was one of the most extraordinary
movements of modern times, and can only find a parallel in that of
Mohammed himself, whose follower the Mahdi or Prophet of God
professed to be.  With a success at first truly marvellous, he
managed so to impress his claims to sanctity upon the Arab tribes of
the Soudan, that they flocked to his standard in thousands.  {90}
Cleverly seizing the occasion of discontent at excessive taxation and
the destruction of the slave trade, which, under European influence,
the Egyptian government had attempted, the Mahdi el Muntazer raised
the cry of revolt, and openly proclaimed himself, by the grace of God
and his Prophet, master of the country.  His fanatical pretensions,
carrying the weight of religious sanctity, bore down all opposition
for a time.  General Gordon was sent to stem the torrent, and
reaching Khartoum on the 18th of February 1884, bravely held it
against overwhelming numbers for eleven months.

The British authorities who were responsible for Gordon's
appointment, but who were unfortunately not equally alive to the
danger of his position, resolved at length upon an expedition for his
relief, to proceed by the Red Sea to the port of Suakim to operate in
the Eastern Soudan, between the sea and the River Nile, where a
number of Egyptian garrisons were being threatened by the rebellious
tribes under Osman Digna.  British troops in and about Cairo,
Alexandria, and other stations were at once despatched under the
command of Sir Gerald Graham to quell the disturbance.  Wauchope, who
had received the appointment from Lord Wolseley of Assistant-Adjutant
and Quartermaster-General to the expedition, left England on short
notice, and, accompanied by Sir Redvers Buller, arrived in the Red
Sea towards the end of February, in time to take his share in active
operations against the enemy, who were strongly fortified and in
possession of Tokar.

[Sidenote: Battle of El-Teb]

The expeditionary force was landed at Trinkitat, a port on the Red
Sea, some miles south of Suakim, and Tokar being inland, a long and
fatiguing march had to be undertaken to reach it.  When half-way they
encountered {91} the Arabs in a strongly entrenched position in the
desert at the wells of El-Teb, and here, on the 29th February, a
fierce conflict took place, the Arabs fighting with great
determination.  The Black Watch and the York and Lancashire Regiment
took a prominent part in the battle, and suffered severely.  To the
former fell the main attack on the right and centre of the enemy's
position, where their chief strength lay, protected as it was by
skilfully constructed rifle-pits, defended by resolute men, ready to
die rather than yield.

Captain Wauchope escaped with his life as by a miracle.  Being on
horseback, charging the enemy's guns, he was a prominent figure in
the fight, and was unfortunately struck down by a musket-shot, which
entered the lower part of his body.  He was only saved from instant
death by the friendly intervention of his binoculars, which were
hanging by his side, the bullet striking the glass and smashing it to
pieces.  He was carried off the field, and at once attended to.  But
the wound was of such a serious nature that little hope was
entertained of his recovery.  The battle over, and the Arabs
completely routed, the British force proceeded on their way to Tokar
without further opposition, and relieved the small garrison there.
Wauchope and the other wounded men were taken back to Trinkitat and
put on board ship for Suez.

When sufficiently recovered to be able to be removed from the
hospital, he rejoined the Black Watch at Cairo in the month of April.
The binoculars which, it may be said, saved his life at El-Teb have
been carefully preserved, and may now be seen in their shattered
condition among other relics and war trophies in Niddrie House.

For his gallant conduct at the battle of El-Teb, Wauchope received a
favourable mention in General {92} Graham's despatches, which
procured for him the medal and two clasps, and what was perhaps of
more importance, the rank of Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel.

He suffered long and severely from the wound he had received, but he
was much benefited in health by a visit which he made to his old
friend Sir Robert Biddulph at Mount Troodos in Cyprus during the
summer of that year.

In the autumn came further rumours from the Soudan of the rising
power of the Mahdi, and the danger with which General Gordon was
threatened of being overwhelmed in the capture of Khartoum.  It was
now resolved that active and immediate steps should be taken in order
if possible to relieve him, notwithstanding that the distance was
great, and the road perilous, and to a great extent unknown.  The
Black Watch was called upon once more to undertake this difficult
task, and officers and men responded to the call with enthusiastic
delight.  The regiment at Cairo numbered about 700, and at an
inspection there by General Sir Garnet Wolseley on 16th September, he
complimented Colonel Bayly and the officers and men under him on the
highly efficient state in which they then were, and the pride with
which the people of England had followed them in the gallant
upholding of 'the honour of their splendid and historic regiment.'
'I do not think,' he continued, 'there will be much fighting in the
coming campaign, but there will be very hard work, and I shall want
you to show that you can work hard as well as fight.  If there is any
fighting to be done, I know that I have only to call on the Black
Watch, and you will behave as you have always done.'

[Sidenote: Relief of Khartoum]

The sequel proved this to be a true forecast.  The expedition was
beset with difficulties from first to last, and the {93} labour
involved was enormous--the pity of it being, that after all, the
result was not commensurate with the cost, and was altogether
disappointing.  With Cairo as their starting-point and Khartoum as
their goal, the intervening space of over fifteen hundred miles, with
its sandy plains, its waste howling wilderness, held by hostile
tribes of Arabs, had to be covered by our troops.  This was a work of
no ordinary kind, and involved not only skill in planning, but
persevering toil in execution, which tried to the utmost the stuff
our soldiers are made of.  The Black Watch, led by such men as
Colonels Green, Bayly, Kidston, Coveny, Eden, and Wauchope were a
host in themselves, and abundantly justified the confidence reposed
in them by the commander-in-chief.  The expedition started on 5th
October by rail to Assouan, where they hoped immediately to begin the
ascent of the Nile by steamers and barges.  Unfortunately, one or two
cases of smallpox here broke out among the men of the 42nd, and the
regiment was compelled to go into quarantine for four weeks.  They
pitched their camp within a palm-grove close to Assouan on the banks
of the Nile, and the tedium of enforced idleness was relieved by
preparation for the arduous task before them.  Colonel Wauchope
energetically exerted himself during these weeks, and in the off
hours of drill encouraged the men not only in out-door sports of all
kinds, but was active in getting up theatrical and other
entertainments for their amusement.  In this way the time passed
pleasantly until the regiment was released from quarantine on 12th
November, when the real forward movement for the relief of General
Gordon commenced, so far as the Black Watch was concerned.  Embarking
at Philae, famed for its ancient island temple, in steamers and
barges, the voyage of two hundred and {94} fifty miles was safely
accomplished to Wady Halfa, after which, avoiding the second cataract
of the Nile, the journey to Sarras was made overland.  Here there was
considerable detention waiting the arrival of a large flotilla of 800
whale boats--which had been commissioned from England by Lord
Wolseley for transporting the troops up the river.  Regiment after
regiment were here embarked to fight the cataracts, the rapids, and
the shallows of the mysterious river whose source had for ages been
hidden in the dark recesses of the African Continent.  Surely no
stranger or more gigantic armed force ever floated on its waters
either before or since the days of Egypt's ancient greatness!

[Sidenote: The Nile Expedition]

As it was, the British soldier--'capable of going anywhere and doing
anything'--had for the nonce to convert himself into a boatman; and
that he had much to learn in this capacity may be gathered from one
of the jokes familiar to the expeditionary force, to the effect that
one day a man at the helm, on receiving the order 'put your helm
down,' immediately proceeded to place the tiller in the bottom of the
boat, and innocently awaited further orders!  The boats provided were
about thirty feet long, seven feet beam, and with a draught of two
and a half feet.  As the boats were destined each to be
self-supporting, they had, when finally loaded, supplies of
ammunition, ordnance, and commissariat stores for fourteen men for
one hundred days.  But it was not unusual for the boats to be
carrying practically one hundred and twenty days' rations and other
stores, and reserve ammunition for fourteen men, with a crew of eight
men in each boat.  Great caution and skill were necessary in an
expedition so full of novelty and danger, and if accidents did
happen, it is no matter of surprise, {95} considering that it was
through an almost entirely unknown country and among hostile tribes
their course lay.  With a falling river, too, the dangers and
difficulties were increased, for boats were frequently striking
sunken rocks, and springing leaks, which necessitated their being
hauled up on the river bank, unloaded of their tons of stores, and
then repaired by the soldiers themselves, for there was no one else
to do it.  In some places there was barely room for a loaded camel to
pass between the perpendicular rocks; in others, where the path was
wider, the rocks had been prepared for defence by loop-holed stone
sconces.  There was no order or regularity in the formation of the
rocks.  'They seemed,' said one eye-witness, 'to have been upheaved
in a mass, in some great volcanic convulsion, and to have fallen one
upon another in every direction.'

Throughout this remarkable voyage Colonel Wauchope's early naval
experience stood him in good stead.  Having the command of the E
company of the Black Watch he had charge of sixteen boats, with ten
men in each.  He divided the company into two parts so that each
section might have free scope, and collisions be avoided; and, thanks
to his ever watchful eye and naval skill, the soldiers in the boats
speedily became expert sailors.  From the Rev. Mr. Mactaggart, who
accompanied the expedition at the special desire of Colonel Wauchope,
and was in his company, we give the following narrative.  'According
to Lord Wolseley's orders, each boat was to have been provided with
one or two Canadian steersmen, but in some way it was found
impossible to get this, and after two days' delay we succeeded in
getting away with one Canadian in every second boat--eight men
instead of thirty-two; much therefore depended on Wauchope {96}
himself.  Before starting on several occasions, I remember he had all
of us assembled on the river-side, and gave out minute instructions
theoretically and practically how to enter the boat, how to sit on
the bench, how to handle the oar, and how to splice a rope.  His
instructions were always much needed and most excellent.  Then as to
loading and unloading, he would demonstrate how this could most
easily be done, and with least danger.  He was careful to emphasise
his caution as to managing the boats in the strong eddies and
currents of the stream, and above all to avoid racing or endeavouring
to get ahead of each other.  With a vein of humour in his voice, and
yet meant as a serious joke, he would say--"Mind you, my men, no
Derby racing!"  On one occasion, in pulling the boats over a strong
current, two boats' crews were necessary to get one at a time over
it, but through some hitch one of these with its contents would have
been irretrievably lost but for his opportune energy and pluck.  The
men, exhausted with the heavy strain upon them, slackened the rope,
and in a moment the boat had turned and was being carried back.
Wauchope at once seized the rope, and held on to it tenaciously,
though drawn in among the rocks at the edge of the rapid, and had his
hands very much lacerated for his pains.'

[Sidenote: Fighting the Cataracts]

Many incidents--some amusing and some serious enough--occurred in
these daily battles with the river; but Wauchope was ever in the
thick of it if a difficulty occurred; and while as commander he was
prompt in giving his orders, he was never above giving his men a
helping hand when needed.  'It was during our toilsome ascent of the
third and fourth cataracts,' says another comrade of the expedition,
'a staff officer was detailed in charge of different districts up the
banks, whose duty {97} it was to guide and instruct the boats in
their passage up the rapids, or, as the men put it, "to worry and
irritate the troops."  On one occasion Colonel Wauchope's boat was in
trouble, and the staff officer was shouting any amount of advice
gratis from the bank.  Thinking apparently that enough notice was not
being taken of his instructions, he called out, "You No. 2 boat
there, do you know who I am?  I am Colonel Primrose of the Guards."
This immediately drew the following answer from a wild-looking,
red-headed, and half-naked worker in the boat, "And do you know who I
am, sir?  I am Colonel Wauchope of the Black Watch, so honours are
easy!"'  Though otherwise kind to a fault, in the matter of
discipline he was firm as a rock in adhering strictly to orders.
Indeed at this juncture he was invaluable to the regiment, for he
acted at the same time both as president of the canteen and mess; and
as one of his brother officers informs us, 'it was only through his
continual forethought that we were able to obtain supplies for our
daily wants.'  'A favourite dinner on the Nile,' says one of his men,
'which was looked upon as a great luxury, was one pound of bacon per
man, in place of the usual tinned meat, as by dint of self-denial a
bit of it might be saved for breakfast next morning.  This was served
out by the captain, and great was the consternation one day in the
drum-major's boat when the cook fell overboard with the boat's
rations in his hand.  The man was secured, but the bacon went to the
crocodiles.  The matter being reported to Colonel Wauchope, it was
hoped the rations might be replaced.  But not having seen the
accident, he was obdurate.  The ration had been issued and could not
be replaced, so the unfortunate boat's crew worked hard all that day
on biscuit and tea only.  Evening came, and tea was being made when
word was passed {98} along the bank that the drum-major was wanted by
Colonel Wauchope.  Hope sprang up that he had relented at the
eleventh hour; but no such luck.  To his honour be it said, however,
he divided his own pound of bacon with the drum-major that night, and
it was his all, for officers and men fared alike at that time.'
Still they knew their commander, and no grumble was heard.  Though he
might be strict, they all felt he had their interest at heart.

The rough work of fighting the cataracts was telling sorely upon
uniforms and shoes, some of the men being actually in rags.  They had
proceeded as far as Ambu-Kui, and the necessity for having new boots
was so pressing, Wauchope set out two or three miles inland to where
there was a bazaar and bought for his men all the boots and shoes he
could get.  The old dervish from whom he purchased them assured him
with all seriousness of their excellence, saying, 'Well now, oh ye
faithful, if you buy them you can go straight to Paradise'--a
recommendation of his goods which the colonel enjoyed immensely.

[Sidenote: Battle of Kirbekan]

Struggling on from day to day in their toilsome up-river journey, one
hope animated every breast, that the gallant general holding his own
with defection and treachery among his native troops in Khartoum, and
a fanatical horde of Arabs under the Mahdi outside its walls, would
be able to hold out until the arrival of the British force on its way
to relieve him.  General Gordon was in a most critical position.  The
enemy being numerous, and ever increasing, hemmed him in on all
sides, while famine was pressing him even more seriously within.  It
was a long road, and bravely Lord Wolseley encouraged his troops to
renewed exertions.  In the first week of January 1885 the leading
companies of the 42nd Highlanders arrived at Korti, and on the 13th
January the headquarters rowed into Hamdab with {99} fifty-four
boats.  By the 20th the whole regiment was once more together at
Hamdab, and with the South Staffordshire, the 2nd Battalion of the
Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry, the 1st Battalion of the Gordon
Highlanders, one squadron of the 19th Hussars, an Egyptian Camel
Corps, and a section of the Engineers and Bluejackets, formed the
Nile River Column, under Major-General Earle.  Making a further
advance, the difficult Edermih Cataract was surmounted on the 25th
January, and the Kab-el-Abd Cataract two days after.  But it was only
by the daring skill of the Canadian voyageurs and the constant toil
of the whole force that the boats were got successfully over, for now
the currents of the river were getting more difficult to face.  At
the fourth or Bird Cataract they began to feel the enemy in stronger
force, and at Kirbekan, some seven miles further on, the ground
overlooking the Nile was found to be fortified with every
determination to resist the passage of the boats.  The troops were
accordingly formed for battle, and the British line under General
Earle advanced upon the entrenchments.  Finding it impossible,
however, to dislodge the Arabs by musketry fire alone, orders were
given for the Black Watch to carry the position by the bayonet.  The
regiment responded gallantly to the order.  The pipers struck up, and
with a cheer the Black Watch rushed forward with a steadiness and
valour that were irresistible, and which called forth the
enthusiastic admiration of the general.  From the loop-holed walls of
the enemy the rifle puffs shot out continuously, but, undaunted by
danger, the 42nd scaled the rocks, and at the point of the bayonet
drove them from their shelter.

Colonel Bayly of the 42nd, who commanded the left-half battalion, has
favoured us with the following account {100} of Wauchope's intrepid
daring in this action.  'Kirbekan,' he says, 'was one of the last
fights at which I was present with him.  He was in command of a
company of my half battalion in the attack on the Arabs' position, a
high, precipitous rocky range rising from the river's bank.  We were
fully engaged, when Wauchope, asking my leave, descended the
precipitous bank of the river, then in full flood.  Returning in a
few minutes, he said he could take the company over the rocks, and
with perhaps a little wading he could turn the flank of the kopje
held by the enemy.  This he did, and rolled the enemy up to their
final stand, a roughly built stone shanty, where General Earle (who
was in command) and Colonel Coveny met their deaths.  And here
Wauchope himself was badly wounded.'  Meanwhile the cavalry had
captured the enemy's camp, and the Staffordshire regiment had
gallantly stormed the last remaining ridge.  The battle of Kirbekan
was won on the 11th February.

Wauchope was assisted down from among the high rocks by his friends
Captain Stewart and Mr. Mactaggart, the chaplain, and had his wound
attended to by Dr. Harvey and Dr. Flood.  They found his shoulder
very much shattered, and were of opinion that his arm would have to
be amputated.  He himself was apparently not conscious that he was
dangerously wounded, and endeavoured to treat the matter lightly.
Having persuaded the doctors to delay the operation till next day, we
are told he seemed after a little to be more concerned about the
condition of his brother officer, Lord Alexander Kennedy, who had
also been severely wounded in the action, than about himself.  After
further consultation, to the great relief of Wauchope, it was
determined to give him a chance of saving his arm.  The wound was
carefully and successfully {101} dressed.  This disablement, however,
reduced him from the position of an active leader in the expedition
to that of a mere spectator.  He was quite laid aside for a time, and
compelled to remain in one of the boats floating on the Nile--no
pleasant experience for one of his active temperament.

Still keeping Khartoum, with its noble defender, in view, the
expedition, though yet more than 450 miles from their destination,
pushed on with vigour.  Passing Hebbath, the scene of poor Colonel
Stewart's murder by the chief of the Monassir tribe a few months
before, thence to El Kab, where the current is very swift, the 215
boats of the force arrived at Huella, not far from Abu Ahmed, with
its beautiful green sward on the banks of the river.

[Sidenote: Death of Gordon]

This was destined to be the furthest point to which the river
expedition was to penetrate.  Relief had arrived too late, for here
the British force learned that the end had come in Khartoum, and that
all their labour had been in vain.  The city had been treacherously
taken by the Mahdi, and General Gordon had been killed on the 25th
January, or nearly a month before.

As the object of the expedition was said to be merely for the relief
of Gordon with his Egyptian garrison, and the British Government had
determined to abandon the Soudan entirely, there was nothing left for
Lord Wolseley to do on the receipt of this sad intelligence but to
retrace his steps.  On the 13th February, Sir Redvers Buller, with
the Desert Column, which had reached Gubat, evacuated that place;
and, as the reason for the occupation of Berber by the River Column
had practically ceased, orders were received commanding a halt.  Ten
days afterwards the flotilla commenced the return journey down the
swift and {102} broken waters of the Nile.  It was an unfortunate end
of an undecided policy which delayed the relief of the noble Gordon
until it was too late.  Had the Government taken up the matter
earnestly some months earlier than they did, Lord Wolseley's
expedition would not only have saved Gordon a tragic death and
relieved Khartoum, but would then have crushed the power of the Madhi
for ever.  Thus would have been accomplished in 1885 a piece of work
which, simply by being then neglected, had again to be taken up
thirteen years afterwards, but which was brought then to a successful
issue by the entire overthrow on 2nd September 1898 of the Mahdi's
successor by General Sir Herbert Kitchener at Omdurman.

Wauchope all through this expedition had proved himself an invaluable
pioneer in the rough and arduous work they had to encounter, and the
many difficulties to be overcome.  He was highly popular with all
ranks from the Commander-in-Chief to the youngest drummer, for he
looked upon every one as simply his fellow-workers, and was ever
ready to help any in trouble.  'Gifted,' as one of his brother
officers has said of him, 'with a singularly attractive and lovable
disposition, he made friends of every one he met.  With the simplest
of tastes himself, and (after the deaths of his father and brother)
with ample means at his disposal, he used to help more particularly
those married with or without leave in the regiment, and these cases
I only heard of by accident.  He never spoke of them himself.'

[Sidenote: A staunch Prespyterian]

Nor was his interest in his men limited to merely secular matters.
He was deeply impressed with the conviction that, carrying as the
soldier did his life in his hand, there was no class of men who ought
more to be prepared for death.  And facing death, as he so often did
himself, he {103} felt that the consolations of religion should be
within the soldier's reach when needed.  He was a staunch
Presbyterian, loyal to his national religion, and ever ready to give
the chaplain of his regiment his support and help.  When the Nile
Expedition had reached Korti it was resolved that none but fighting
men should go further, and some of the chaplains were accordingly
left behind as an unnecessary impediment.  Just before starting, an
officer of the staff came to the chaplain of the Black Watch, who
happened at the time to be standing beside Colonel Wauchope, with the
order that he was not to proceed further.  The chaplain replied that
there was nothing for him to do at Korti, if he were separated from
the regiment; he urged that he had been sent from Cairo with the
Gordons and the Black Watch, and that he would go with them where
duty called.  Wauchope at once said, 'Stick to that and I will back
you up.'  The chaplain without any further demur was allowed to
proceed, and he was the only chaplain who got beyond the base to be
in time to do duty in action.  In this connection an instance of his
strict military discrimination may be mentioned.  A man of his
company came and complained to him that he had been told off by the
sergeant-major to remain at the base.  A certain number of men of
each corps had been so ordered, and naturally the best soldiers were
not left behind.  Wauchope replied to this man, 'You are a soldier
who is often drunk, often late for parade, often absent, and we can't
depend upon you.  We prefer to take men we can trust.'  The man, very
much crestfallen, and evidently disappointed, said, 'Sir, if you will
take me to the front, I promise you I'll never be brought before an
officer again.'  Wauchope said, 'Very well, I'll take you at your
word, but if you don't keep it, I'll never do {104} anything more for
you.'  The man behaved perfectly well during the campaign, and
loyally kept his word.  'It may be hoped,' says the friend from whom
we have the story, 'that Wauchope's considerate action was the means
of pulling up a man who was on the downward course, and the making of
a good soldier out of a bad one.'

One may be sure that the disappointment of not reaching Khartoum, and
the sudden cessation of their active efforts, had a depressing effect
upon the whole force.  Lord Wolseley, in his message to the Nile
Column ordering it to return, sought to soften the disappointment in
some measure by judicious praise.  'Please,' said he, 'express to the
troops Lord Wolseley's high appreciation of their gallant conduct in
action, and of the military spirit they have displayed in overcoming
the great difficulties presented by the river.  Having punished the
Monassir people for Colonel Stewart's murder, it is not intended to
undertake any further military operations until after the approaching
hot season.'

[Sidenote: The Soudan abandoned]

When once more the expedition headed down-stream, difficult as they
had found it to ascend, the return movement was even more risky and
dangerous.  The eighty-five Canadian steersmen were now found to be
invaluable, or, as one has remarked, 'were worth their weight in
gold.'  Boat after boat with their loads of troops came down at
lightning speed in order of two fathoms' length between each boat.
It required a quick eye and steady steering to avoid collision or
being thrown on the rocks, for half a second was as good as a wreck
when shooting madly between the sunken rocks of the cataracts.  A few
boats came to grief, but only one belonging to the Black Watch.  And
so Wauchope and the other wounded were steered down the great
river--perhaps the most wonderful stream {105} in this world of
ours--to Meraivi.  Rochefoucauld has said that strong minds suffer
without complaining, while weak ones complain without suffering.
Wauchope's exemplary patience under such trying and painful
circumstances, we have been told, was extraordinary.  He was ever
cheerful, and not a murmur escaped his lips.  At Meraivi the regiment
erected huts and an hospital, and remained for two months, but were
always on the alert night and day against threatened attacks by
unfriendly Arabs.  The Government ultimately abandoned the idea of
the reconquest of the Soudan at that time.  It was left to its fate
in the hands of the victorious Mahdi, all the troops being recalled.
Leaving the boats at Akasheh on 8th June, the Black Watch took train
for Wady Halfa, thence to Assouan, then by steamers and _diabehas_ to
Assiout, and thereafter by train to Cairo, which was safely reached
on the morning of the 27th June, Lord Wolseley telegraphing to
London, 'The Black Watch has arrived in splendid condition, and
looking the picture of military efficiency.'

Colonel Wauchope's services in the Nile Expedition of 1884-85 were
acknowledged by two clasps to his Egyptian medal, inscribed Nile and
Kirbekan.

It is a significant commentary upon the modesty of the man, that
while the records of the regiment at this time, from which we have
gathered these particulars of its movements in the Nile Expedition,
were compiled by Colonel Wauchope himself, Colonel Bayly, who was
then its commanding officer, has pointed out to us 'that just for
that reason we will find his name less mentioned than it ought to be.'

The Black Watch returned to Cairo, where they remained for over a
year, during which time Wauchope had quite recovered from his wounds
and was able to resume duty.

{106}

[Sidenote: Malta and Gibraltar]

On the 30th April 1886 the regiment left Cairo, sailing from
Alexandria in the steamship _Poonah_ under orders for Malta, and
reaching that interesting island on the 5th May.  During the three
years that followed, when the 42nd were quartered there, and
afterwards at Gibraltar, Colonel Wauchope was several times home on
leave of absence, but not for any lengthened period.  During these
years, the 42nd had the round of the various barracks with which that
important military station is studded--Ricasoli, St. Elmo, Floriana,
Gozo, and Pembroke Camp.  The last, which is about two miles west of
the harbour and fortifications of Valletta, was occupied for a time
when the troops were engaged in firing practice, and one gentleman
who was then in Malta, acting as assistant to Dr. Wisely, the
resident chaplain, mentions that he always found the Colonel
exceedingly kind, occasionally asking him to join the officers' mess,
and showing him much attention.  From frequent intercourse with him,
he formed the impression that 'he was one of the most modest and
unassuming of men; and, he might add, one of the most sensible.'

But Wauchope's influence and personality were not limited to his
military duties, or to the British soldiers merely.  He had a great
deal to do with the Maltese, especially in connection with the
formation of a Malta Militia.  We are told by Dr. Wisely that he
'entered into the organisation of a body of native militia with his
usual thoroughness; and,' he says, 'by none was he more respected
than by the native inhabitants of the island.  The Maltese loved him.
When the news came of his death, some of them I know wept for sorrow.'

At the sale of the whale-boats of the Nile Expedition, Wauchope
purchased two or three of them, and had them {107} sent to Malta,
where they were largely used, and to good effect, by his men for
recreation purposes.  With a good deal of the sailor in him, he
encouraged races and aquatic sports in and about Valletta, he himself
taking an active personal interest in them, and being a good deal out
with the boats.

His old shipmate of the _St. George_, Prince Alfred, who had now been
created Duke of Edinburgh, and was then serving as captain of one of
the warships in the Mediterranean, and afterwards as
commander-in-chief of the Malta station, came a good deal in contact
with Wauchope at this time.  There was a frequent interchange of
visits between them.  'The Duke,' says Colonel Bayly, 'had always the
greatest regard for Wauchope, calling him, as of old, by his
Christian name of Andy, and showing the utmost friendship.'  In this
way the otherwise tedious routine of garrison duty was considerably
lightened.

In June 1889, Wauchope was honoured by having conferred upon him by
Her Majesty the distinction of Companion of the Most Honourable Order
of the Bath, in recognition of his splendid services in Egypt.

On the 8th August, the battalion of the Black Watch left Malta for
Gibraltar in H.M.S. _Himalaya_, and disembarked at the Rock on the
13th, taking up their quarters in the south barracks.  The regiment
had a prolonged stay of nearly three years at Gibraltar, but during
that period Colonel Wauchope, in addition to his being home several
times on furlough, had frequent opportunities of making visits in
Spain and on the coast of Algiers and Morocco.  His actual term of
foreign service only extended to February 1891, when he returned to
Scotland to take the command of the 2nd Battalion at Maryhill
Barracks, Glasgow.

{108}

During his residence at Gibraltar in 1890, he twice over occupied for
a time a rather unusual position, being called upon to take command
of the garrison.  While actually in charge of only a company, he also
commanded the battalion owing to the temporary absence of Colonel
Gordon on leave.  The major-general having been called away at the
same time, Wauchope, by virtue of his army seniority, took over the
command of the infantry brigade of four regiments as well.  None were
quicker than himself to see the possibilities of this peculiar
situation.  As he put it, with a humorous smile--'Now, suppose a man
of my company has a complaint to make, and I decide against him, as I
probably should: his remedy is to appeal to the officer commanding
his regiment, and he gets Andrew Wauchope again to judge the case.
His next appeal would be to the general, and again he comes before
Andrew Wauchope; but being only human myself, I fear he would find
the decision confirmed, and he would go away with the reflection,
that it was "Andrew Wauchope all along the line!"'

It is needless to say this problematical contingency never arose, and
so he was saved from acting in any such triple capacity.




{109}

CHAPTER VII

THE MIDLOTHIAN CAMPAIGN


'A Scot of the Scots,' General Wauchope was a man of many parts.
Great in arms, he was equally great in the arts of peace; and in the
political world, strangely enough, he carved out for himself a
reputation quite unique.  Though his countrymen were naturally proud
of his distinguished services as a soldier, they knew him also, it
has been well said, as the man who by pertinacious pluck and sweet
conciliation brought down Mr. Gladstone's majority in the county of
Midlothian.  Liberal politicians both in England and Scotland will
not have forgotten the horrified astonishment with which they read
the figures of the poll in that county at the General Election of
1892.

Mr. Gladstone had been returned for the metropolitan county of
Scotland in 1880, after his great campaign, by a small majority
against the present Duke of Buccleuch, at that time Earl of Dalkeith.
That was under the old and restricted franchise.  In 1885, when the
miners and farm hands had largely through his influence obtained
votes, he defeated Sir Charles Dalrymple--a man respected by all who
knew him, and by many who did not--by two to one, and something over.
Nobody thought any more about Midlothian.  It was regarded as Mr.
Gladstone's {110} stronghold, and the Liberals went to sleep in the
comfortable assurance that the seat was theirs so long as he lived.
Nor were their slumbers disturbed by the unopposed election of July
1886, when throughout the country the Liberal party suffered a
serious defeat consequent upon Mr. Gladstone's attempt, as Prime
Minister, to pass what was popularly known as the Home Rule Bill for
Ireland.  Mr. Gladstone retained his seat, but was obliged to resign
his position as First Lord of the Treasury; and the Home Rule Bill in
course of the next six years, under the administration of Lord
Salisbury, became practically a thing of the past.  During that time
remarkable changes were effected in the constituency.  In Edinburgh
the Conservative party had rallied.  Its leaders did not lack
courage, even under the most hopeless circumstances, and they
resolved to bring forward one whose determination and courage had
been well tried, though in an entirely different field.  At a meeting
of the Midlothian Liberal Unionist Association in Edinburgh on the
18th November 1889, the proposal of the committee to adopt Colonel
Wauchope of Niddrie as their representative was unanimously carried.

[Sidenote: Opposes Mr. Gladstone]

It was admitted on all hands that his acceptance of such a proposal
involved the undertaking of a very hard task: one speaker at the
meeting even going so far as to say that 'while he did not anticipate
they were to win the county, he was sure that if Colonel Wauchope led
this forlorn hope, it would not be an inglorious defeat.'

Notwithstanding the rather doubtful prospects of success which his
supporters gave, Wauchope's reply was characteristic of the man.  He
accepted the honour and the responsibility all the more readily, it
would appear, that it was accompanied by difficulties.  After
thanking the meeting for asking him to come forward at the next
election, {111} he said he should be more than human if he did not
feel deeply gratified.  If he had been an orator, or if he had been a
man engaged in public affairs, he would not have been surprised.  But
though he was an utterly untried man, he would do his best to try and
serve, he should not say their interests, but the interests of the
cause which they had all at heart.  He was sure they would rally
round the old flag--the flag of the Union.  It spoke well for the
future of Unionism throughout the land; and their native county of
Midlothian had in this respect shown a good example to the rest of
the country.  They must never lose sight of the fact that this battle
that was going on now was not a battle only in Midlothian, but it was
a battle 'all along the line,' from Land's End to John o' Groats.
They were only a mere part of that fight; and if it were a 'forlorn
hope' here, it was of the greatest advantage to the great cause that
they made a good 'forlorn hope' of it!  He felt the responsibility
very much to play the part of leader to them when they might so
easily have got a better one.  'However,' he said, 'the choice is
with you.  I did not seek it, but shall do my best to come to the end
of the business in a proper way.'  Here it will be seen there was
both boldness and modesty, confidence in the cause he was to
champion, and self-reliance, without overrating his ability for the
hazard.  His opposition to Irish Home Rule and the possible
disintegration of the Empire made him fearless, even to the extent of
daring to oppose in person the great commander-in-chief of the Home
Rule army.

At this time he was home from Gibraltar for a short furlough, and
with evidently no expectation of taking any prominent part in
politics; and so, his term of leave of absence having nearly expired,
he was unable to follow up {112} his nomination by any active
movement.  He accordingly returned to Gibraltar on 4th December.  In
January following he got, however, a further leave of absence from
29th January till 31st May, during which time he took full advantage
of the opportunity.  Though there was no near prospect of an
election, he at once set about his canvass with all the
characteristic energy of his nature, devoting all his spare time to
addressing meetings of the electors in the various villages and
parishes of the county.  This preliminary canter over, he rejoined
his regiment at Gibraltar in June 1890, leaving politics all behind
him, and entering with fresh zest into his military duties.

[Sidenote: Canvass of the Electors]

The Liberal press of the country, as a rule, treated Colonel
Wauchope's candidature with the utmost indifference, if not with
contempt, regarding it as a foregone conclusion that it would end in
nothing.  Indeed, his splendid audacity provoked the Radical party to
mirth, and even in Unionist circles there was much shaking of heads.
On all hands, by political friends and foes alike, every
consideration and deference was shown, and he was listened to
generally in respectful silence, rarely with open opposition; but his
claims were not considered serious enough to work out to a conclusion
that would at all affect Mr. Gladstone's position as the sitting
member.  Was Mr. Gladstone not the first statesman of the day, and
the most brilliant Chancellor of the Exchequer of the century?--a man
who, it has been wittily said, 'could apply all the resources of a
burnished rhetoric to the illustration of figures; who could make
pippins and cheese interesting, and tea serious; who could sweep the
widest horizon of the financial future and yet stop to bestow the
minutest attention on the microcosm of penny stamps and post horses.'
To oppose such a man seemed madness.  The feeling was, {113} however,
more of pity that a good man should waste his energies on a hopeless
effort, than any fear of danger to the Liberal cause.  The following,
as the expression of a Liberal editor, may be taken as a fair
specimen of the general feeling at the time:--'The answer to the
question of the Scotsman, "Where is the candidate for Midlothian?"
has at last been answered.  Colonel Wauchope is a good and a brave
man, and one almost regrets that he should have been prevailed upon
to lead a forlorn hope.  Almost all that was said of Sir Charles
Dalrymple when he contested the county, may be said of the Laird of
Niddrie.  His heart is in the right place.  He is justly held in much
esteem as a landlord and county gentleman, as well as for his gallant
services to his country.  Sir Charles is, however, more of and
perhaps a better politician, and where HE failed, Colonel Wauchope
can have little chance of success.'

These pessimistic effusions had no more effect upon Wauchope than
water on a duck's back.  He had given his word, the die was cast, and
deliberately and systematically he carried out his resolution.
Beginning at his own village of New Craighall--chiefly inhabited by
the miners belonging to the coal-pits on his estate--he commenced his
campaign in the schoolroom on 10th February 1890, his friend and
neighbour Sir Charles Dalrymple acting as chairman.  In the course of
his speech, Sir Charles referred to the difficult task Colonel
Wauchope had undertaken, but was of opinion that his experience in
the army had taught him not to shrink from a task because it was
difficult.  Indeed, he thought that to Colonel Wauchope a task of
difficulty was more attractive than an easy one.  He was above all
things plain-spoken and thorough, and if he made statements on public
questions, they might be sure {114} that he would not have to answer
them or explain them away at a subsequent period.

It is not necessary we should follow his footsteps throughout the
county on this first round of addresses to the electors, or of his
second round the following year, when he again returned from
Gibraltar, and finally in 1892 when the general election took place.
His personal canvass too of nearly fifteen thousand electors was a
remarkable experience, and was conducted by him with much tact.

[Sidenote: Electioneering difficulties]

It is needless to say these repeated appearances proved an excellent
training for him in the art of public speaking.  He addressed the
electors on all subjects of public importance from Home Rule as the
all-absorbing question of the day, to questions of Imperial and local
interest.  It must be admitted his early speeches bore the
unmistakable signs of the amateur in platform oratory, and when too
hard pressed by a pertinacious heckler he had sometimes to admit he
was nonplussed, but that he would give the embarrassing question his
full attention, and express his opinion on it when he had formed it.
This want of experience told heavily against him, and frequently he
had difficulty in getting a hearing, or in being able clearly to
express his views on some of the topics dealt with.  But a breakdown
did not put him very much out; he always managed to please his
audience before he was done, with some happy remark given with the
utmost good-nature.  His utterances, sometimes diffuse and incoherent
at first, very soon grew in confidence as well as in clearness, and
before the election was over there were few public speakers better
able to command the attention of a large audience than Andrew Gilbert
Wauchope of Niddrie.

As he progressed in fluency of utterance he grew in popularity.  The
householders of the middle class {115} certainly showed no sympathy
for his claims, and almost closed their doors in his face.  They were
Gladstonian to a man.  But, notwithstanding this, the Colonel
gradually acquired a hold upon the industrial and agricultural
workmen.  He had, as they said, 'a way with him.'  He talked to them
in every village about politics and about their own lives.  He never
indulged in personal abuse of Mr. Gladstone--on the contrary, when he
did refer to him it was always with the utmost respect, as one or two
of his speeches before us testify.  As a rule, the working classes
are not slow to recognise a gentleman, and they soon found the
Colonel was one to the back-bone; one who had a human heart and could
do a kind deed.  At a meeting in the early part of the campaign, a
mining village had crowded its men into a hall to hear the man who
dared to oppose Mr. Gladstone.  The meeting was very noisy, and
ill-disposed to listen--so much so that a speech was impossible.
When things were becoming serious, a smart-looking working man,
apparently in the thirties, stepped on to the platform amidst the
hubbub, much to the Colonel's surprise.  Nobody knew what was coming,
and the singularity of the proceeding secured silence, in which the
unexpected orator spoke to the following effect:--'I dinna ken very
much about politics, but I was wounded at Tel-el-Kebir, and a man
came up to me as I lay on the ground, and after giving me a drink
from his water-bottle carried me back to a place of safety.  That man
is on the platform to-night, and that's the man I'm gaen to vote
for.'  The effect was electrical; the Colonel was not only listened
to, he was cheered to the echo, and the incident made a deep
impression on many present.

Frequently, of course, he had to stand a good deal of interruption
and good-natured chaff, but he was generally {116} ready with a happy
retort.  'Does your mother know you're out?' was shouted to him from
the back part of a hall one night in the middle of his speech by a
roisterous opponent.  'Oh yes,' quietly replied the Colonel
parenthetically, 'but she will very soon know that I am in!'

[Sidenote: Tramping the constituencies]

Another questioner, evidently thinking he had a poser, put it to the
candidate: 'If war breaks out, will you be able to represent the
county?' to which he returned the laconic and crushing reply: 'My
man, if war breaks out, I'll be there'--an answer which at once
evoked a ringing cheer and turned the meeting largely in his favour.
Of course he did not convert all the miners to his way of thinking,
but he managed to retain their esteem all the same.  'I like ye,
Colonel, but I canna vote for ye,' said a conscientious miner to him
one day, and doubtless the Colonel appreciated his humble political
opponent all the more for his genuine frankness.  Few who were
present at his first political meeting in New Craighall schoolroom
will readily forget the difficulty he had in getting through with the
subject of land values.  After wandering over half the Continent for
practical illustrations, he at length lost the thread of his
discourse, and got into a hopeless maze.  For a minute or two he
stood speechless, while his face became quite florid, as he fiercely
pounded his left hand with his fist in his own characteristic
fashion.  A happy inspiration came at last.  Turning his back upon
the audience, he suddenly seized one of the newspaper reporters
sitting near, and commanded him to stand up.  'What have you got down
there?  Read it!'  With some difficulty the reporter obeyed.  'That's
not what I want to say at all.  Put it out.  We can't have that go
into the papers; put it down this way,' and then he proceeded to tell
him what he meant to say.

{117}

'I was miserably beaten,' he remarked next day to a friend; 'but I've
determined to master politics, and I'll do it.' How he did it every
one knows.  With a volume of Gladstone's speeches in his pocket, he
tramped the constituencies, and on the eve of the election, at a
meeting of seventeen hundred persons in the Corn Exchange of
Dalkeith, which was even honoured by the presence of cabinet
ministers, the speech of the evening was admitted to be that made by
Colonel Wauchope.

All this involved, of course, active exertion, as well as
concentration of thought and study, and the very servants in the
house could see he was absorbed in thought as he never had been
before.  Even his walks about the grounds were less frequent than
before, for the things that used formerly to interest him were passed
unheeded by, as with face to the ground he appeared to be thinking
out some problem or composing a speech.  In his room piles of papers
littered the floor, and the preparations for speeches must have been
enormous for one not accustomed to this kind of work.  One night he
had sat up late preparing a speech, making cuttings and pasting them
together to be ready for reference.  In order that they might be
properly dried, he left them on the fender overnight, and when the
girl came in in the morning to put on the fire, thinking it was a lot
of wastepaper she used it for that purpose.  Of course the Colonel
made inquiries about his papers, and for some time there was great
consternation among the servants when it was known what had happened,
and the admission had to be made that they had been destroyed.  It
was very different with him, however.  He laughed the matter over,
and told the poor girl never to mind, as it was more than likely it
would end in smoke at any rate!

{118}

By the end of March 1891 Colonel Wauchope had a second time visited
the whole of the constituency, or, as a Radical paper put it, 'had
been overhauling the preserves of the Grand Old Man,' but admitting
frankly, at the same time, that 'he seemed everywhere to be received
with marked attention and respect.'

[Sidenote: An eventful night]

One of the largest of these meetings, held in Dalkeith on 31st
January, gave him an opportunity of twitting the Liberals upon their
alliance with Mr. Parnell, and upon the exposure made to the country
by his having a bag of lime thrown in his face, 'not by an alien
Saxon, but by a Paddy belonging to the soil, in the county of
Kilkenny, in the very midst of dear old Ireland.'  The great issue,
he said, now before the country has been wonderfully cleared up, and
he strongly believed that if the people of this country could have
the truth put before them, there would be no more talk of Home
Rule--referring, of course, to the scandal connected with the Irish
leader's temporary retirement from political life by recent exposures
in the Divorce Court.

These peregrinations through the county brought Colonel Wauchope in
contact with all classes of people.  The very reporters, whose duty
it was to follow him and report his speeches, he made friends of, and
by all who had dealings with him he was regarded as the most genial
and generous-minded of political candidates.  As one of them said,
'he was affability itself, and gave the impression of regarding the
reporters as his personal friends.'  One of these gentlemen has given
us the following graphic account of an electioneering visit to one of
the outlying parishes in the county:--


Once in the course of one of his Midlothian tours we had something in
the nature of adventure.  He was to address an {119} evening meeting
at Heriot, and arrangements were duly made for the stopping of an
outgoing express which left the Waverley Station about six o'clock,
as well as for the stopping of the Pullman express in order to bring
him back to Edinburgh.  The arrangement was so beautifully fine that
it failed disastrously.  To begin with, the departure of the outgoing
train was delayed for over twenty minutes awaiting a Glasgow
connection, and, to make matters worse, the fact that the village of
Heriot is about two miles distant from the railway station had been
totally disregarded--if, indeed, it was known.  The result was that
the candidate, his agent, and the writer alighted at Heriot Station
just about the time that the meeting was announced to begin.  There
was nothing for it but walking.  In a drenching rain the three of us
set out for the meeting-place.  When we had accomplished a
considerable part of the journey we were overtaken by a light country
van.  The driver on having our plight explained to him, readily gave
us a 'lift,' and in this way we reached Heriot about the time we
ought to have been leaving it in order to catch the train that was
being stopped for the express purpose of picking us up.  The
audience, it was evident, was not quite in the best of humour at
having been kept waiting so long; but the explanation of the Colonel,
and his candid, honest attitude won the hearts of his audience, and
he had an excellent reception.  A passage in his speech on that
occasion is worth recalling in the light of the event over which all
Scotland to-day mourns.  'People state,' he said, 'that I am a
warlike candidate; but, gentlemen, I have twice or thrice been shot
in the body already, and I declare to you I have no great desire to
be shot again.'  At the close of the meeting we set out on the return
trudge to Heriot, painfully aware of the fact that the last train had
gone, and not knowing in the least how or where we were going to pass
the night.  In the course of our march, I remember, the Colonel
turned to me and said seriously, 'I hope you don't get into any
bother over this?'  I assured him that he need have no anxiety on
that score.  'Because,' he added, 'I'll sign any certificate you
like.'  The remark was quite like him.  It reflected at once the
soldier and the considerate gentleman.  Well, when we {120} got to
the railway station, we found that the train that was to have picked
us up, had passed quite an hour previously.  The stationmaster, I
remember, took in the situation sympathetically at a glance.  If he
was not a sturdy Unionist he must have been one of the General's
numerous admirers.  'There is nothing for it,' said he, 'but to walk
up the line to Falahill, where we may have a chance of getting a
pilot engine to run you down at least to Dalkeith.' Accordingly the
stationmaster lit a lamp, and the four of us started to walk up the
line in the dark, wet night.  When we reached Falahill we learned
with intense relief that a spare engine was at that very moment
pushing up a goods train from Eskbank.  The train arrived at the
signal-box in the course of a very few minutes, and in the course of
a few minutes more the Colonel, his agent, and myself had mounted the
spare engine.  The engine-driver was a brick.  He drove us down the
hill like the wind--tender first, by the way.  We alighted from the
engine at the point where the Dalkeith section debouches from the
main line, and after the chilling effect of our rough ride, at once
started off at a smart pace to walk to Dalkeith Station.  We reached
Dalkeith exactly at ten minutes to ten o'clock.  There were thus ten
minutes left to us in which to obtain a much-needed refreshment, and
we needed little persuasion to visit an adjoining inn for the
purpose.  We caught the last train from Dalkeith, and were in the
Waverley Station about half-past ten o'clock.  Many a time afterwards
was that eventful evening recalled by all three.


In the spring of this same year (1891), when political parties in
Midlothian were busy preparing for the possibility of a general
election occurring in the following year, a portion of Colonel
Wauchope's regiment was ordered home from Gibraltar, and he was
posted to the Second Battalion to be stationed at Belfast.  This
transference made him now second in command, with the rank of Senior
Major of the Black Watch.  He did not therefore require to go back to
Gibraltar again, but served the {121} greater part of this and the
following year, first in Belfast and afterwards in Limerick.

[Sidenote: Third tour of Midlothian]

In January 1892 Colonel Wauchope began his third tour of Midlothian,
carrying it on with energy for the next three months.  Still the
dogged determination to do well and thoroughly what he had undertaken
is patent in all the steps of his progress.  The 'forlorn hope' was
now looking more hopeful, and his opponents were beginning to take
alarm.  At one meeting it had been insinuated that Mr. Gladstone
being an old man of eighty-two, he was only working with a view to
ultimately taking the great statesman's place.  He repudiated the
idea with all the eloquence he could command.  'It had been said that
he was waiting to step into dead men's shoes.  That, he thought, was
striking a bit below the belt.  He certainly could look any man in
Midlothian straight in the face--ay, into his very eye--and say that
he was waiting to fill no dead man's shoes.  He was telling the
truth, and nothing but the truth, when he said he hoped Mr. Gladstone
might live for many years.  He knew that a greater statesman than Mr.
Gladstone perhaps never lived in this country; but, despite that, he
was sorry to say he could not agree with his policy.  Indeed, the
more he admired Mr. Gladstone's genius, and the more wonderful he
considered all that he had done, the more deeply and the more
profoundly did he regret the course he had pursued in regard to the
Irish Home Rule question.  There was no doubt that the greatest men
had made the greatest mistakes.'  Home Rule he characterised in
another speech as 'Federalism that would completely change the
character of the Government of the United Kingdom,' and 'he could not
help feeling it was a measure which would never be sanctioned by the
people of this country.'

{122}

As a counteractive to the Colonel's prolonged canvass, a great
Liberal demonstration took place in Edinburgh on 29th March, when, in
addition to the great statesman himself, Lord Carrington, Governor of
New South Wales, appeared.

Parliament was dissolved three months after, on 25th June, and
immediately the electoral battle was waged with greater intensity.
Mr. Gladstone came down to Edinburgh on the 30th June to begin a tour
of the county, and the eyes of the whole country were turned upon
Midlothian and the fate of the great leader of the Liberal party.
Charmed with the flow of eloquence, crowded audiences hung upon his
lips, and, no doubt, led away with the popular enthusiasm with which
he was on all hands greeted, Mr. Gladstone's supporters overlooked
the influence that had silently but surely been working against his
return, and were incredulous as to the possibility of defeat, while a
too confident committee were thought to have relaxed their efforts.
One Radical writer had no hesitation in saying, that 'as to the
result of the election, no one seems to have any doubt.  It is fully
admitted that Colonel Wauchope is in many respects an admirable
candidate, but to compare him with Mr. Gladstone is looked upon by
the latter gentleman's followers as almost ludicrous!'

The result was nevertheless looked forward to with the utmost
interest.  Speculation ran high; and while the odds were certainly in
favour of Mr. Gladstone, an element of uncertainty was daily growing
as the polling-day drew near, which only whetted public curiosity the
more.

[Sidenote: Getting into a funk]

It was even said that the Colonel himself, in view of his rapidly
increasing popularity, was beginning to be apprehensive that he was
actually to be elected--a result he {123} neither expected nor
greatly wished.  'I am getting into a funk,' he remarked--whether
seriously or not we cannot tell--when his agents told him he was
likely to win the seat from Mr. Gladstone.  'You know, I don't want
to go into Parliament; I want to be Commander of the Black Watch.'
He had stood forward when asked as the champion of his party.  He had
opposed what he considered the errors of the Liberals.  He would have
none of Mr. Gladstone's Home Rule policy.  He was opposed to the
Disestablishment of the Church of Scotland.  He was against the
enforcement of an eight hours limit of labour as an infringement of
individual liberty, while he held that the foreign policy of the
country under Liberal Governments had not always commanded public
confidence.  For three years he had earnestly and well enunciated the
principles for which he contended, but as to turning Mr. Gladstone
out of his seat at last, we can well believe that he shrank from the
bare possibility of it as the day of the poll approached.

The Midlothian election took place on the 12th July.  Out of a
constituency of 13,134, no less than 11,000 tendered their votes--or
84 per cent. of the total.  It must be borne in mind that a large
number of the returns throughout the country had already been made,
and these in many cases showed in favour of the Liberal cause.
Indeed, Lord Salisbury's majority in the House of Commons had
disappeared, and each day brought additions to the Liberal majority.
The party was naturally elated, and so far as Midlothian was
concerned it was confidently predicted that Mr. Gladstone's majority
would not be less than 2500.  The result of the poll was made known
next day at the Edinburgh County Buildings before an immense
concourse of people.  It was one of the biggest {124} surprises Mr.
Gladstone's supporters encountered during the General Election, so
far certainly as Scotland was concerned.  The counting of the votes
was completed about a quarter to one o'clock, and an unofficial
intimation of the result soon found its way outside.  It put Mr.
Gladstone's majority at 673.  There was a crowd of some thousands in
number on the street in front of the court-house, and the
announcement that Mr. Gladstone's majority had been reduced below 700
gave rise to a scene of extraordinary excitement.  The crowd surged
up to the door to hear the figures, and as the cry 'Gladstone in by
700' was passed from one to another, a roar of astonishment, we are
told, went up from a thousand throats.  The noise brought hundreds of
more excited politicians flocking to the scene.  Town Council
committee men and young men from the adjoining Parliament House of
every shade of politics hurried up to join the excited throng.  Blank
dismay took hold of every Gladstonian countenance.  Some of them
could nor restrain themselves, and the most convenient object on
which to vent their indignation was apparently the Church of
Scotland, which came in for no little share of abuse as the cause of
it all.

[Sidenote: Result of the poll]

When it is recalled that in 1885 Mr. Gladstone had been elected by a
majority of 4631, and that in the following year his return was not
opposed, the figures of 1892 very well justified Colonel Wauchope's
daring.  These were, for Mr. Gladstone 5845, and for the Colonel
5150--a majority for the former of 690.  In other words, Mr.
Gladstone had lost 2000 votes, and Colonel Wauchope had polled nearly
2000 more than had been recorded for Sir Charles Dalrymple in 1885.
Neither of the candidates happened to be at the County Buildings when
the declaration of the poll was made, so that after the first
surprise {125} was over the crowd dispersed.  It had been the
intention to have at once sent a telegram to Mr. Gladstone, who was
residing with Lord Rosebery at Dalmeny, but it is said that so great
was the perplexity among his supporters, that the telegram though
made out was not despatched till later on, for, like the crowd
outside, the people in the corridors refused for a time to credit the
figures.  Colonel Wauchope had a most enthusiastic reception accorded
to him at his committee rooms in Princes Street, and on being called
upon for a speech, said he would not make a speech, because he felt
it to be true that it was the committee of Midlothian that had won
this victory.  It was, he repeated, the committee; it was the men who
had stood by their guns at the committee rooms, the men who had
assiduously and earnestly worked for the cause--a duty he feared not
always of the most agreeable kind.  But they had done their work
well, and it was to them that they owed this great victory--because
it was a victory--that would resound throughout the length and
breadth of the land.  'It is true, I have been the standard-bearer in
this fight, and I hope I have borne the standard not without
discredit to myself.  But it is very little that a standard-bearer
can do if he is not supported by an army on the right and an army on
the left of him, and I am here to acknowledge that I have been
supported, and well supported, by a noble army both on my right and
on my left.  We have fought a good fight, and a straight fight, and
we have proved that the heart of Midlothian beats sound enough.'

The result of this Midlothian election was admitted on all hands, and
by none more so than the Liberals themselves, as 'a grievous
surprise,' 'an eye-opener,' 'a severe lesson.'  It was realised now
that after all Colonel Wauchope's candidature had not been quite the
'forlorn {126} hope' they had at first predicted it to be.  As one of
the party papers afterwards remarked, 'They had been taught the
lesson that it does not do to depend too much upon the individuality
of any one, however eminent, to carry a seat....  The advanced party
was caught napping.' ... 'It is,' they said, 'most astonishing to
find how well Colonel Wauchope is respected in the constituency now,
and how much he has improved in his treatment of political questions.
The outspoken and transparent honesty of his character has made him
troops of friends in all quarters, and the attention with which he
was received both by friends and opponents at the various
polling-booths must have been gratifying to the gallant Colonel
himself in no ordinary degree, as well as encouraging alike to him
and his supporters to try conclusions again.'

Seldom has a defeat been reckoned so much of a victory.  Those of the
'forlorn hope' were amazed, for what at first appeared so hopeless
had come within the region of possibility.  Wauchope's name was on
every lip and at the point of every pen.  The Midlothian election
startled the political world, and sobered the joy of Liberals; for
even the return of a majority of members to Parliament, sufficient
with the aid of the Irish Nationalists to turn out the Conservative
Government of Lord Salisbury and to place Mr. Gladstone in office,
was, in the estimation of many of that great statesman's admirers,
scarcely compensation enough for such a downcome.

[Sidenote: Corn Exchange banquet]

Immediately after the election, on the 18th July, Colonel Wauchope
was entertained to a house dinner by the Scottish Conservative Club,
at which Sir Charles Dalrymple presided.  The Unionists of Midlothian
also recognised Colonel Wauchope's efforts and the sacrifices he had
made in the contest by a grand banquet given {127} in his honour in
the Corn Exchange, one of the largest halls in Edinburgh, on the 20th
August.  Beautifully decorated for the occasion, and filled as it was
by over a thousand of the leading men of the party, and a large
number of ladies in the galleries, the banquet was a spectacle of
remarkable brilliancy and beauty.

The meeting was presided over by the Duke of Buccleuch, who, in
proposing their guest's health, congratulated the company upon the
occasion which had brought so many of them together as
representatives of every parish in the county, after a fight in which
the interest of the whole country had been centred--a fight which was
looked upon a short time ago as a forlorn hope--a fight with one of
the most powerful men in the kingdom--one who came down here, you may
say, as the idol of the people.  'It is unusual,' said his Grace, 'to
celebrate a defeat; I will not call it that.  I cannot call it a
victory, but I will call it a very great success.  It has been a
success that has astonished ourselves, but it has done more than
that--it has created consternation among our opponents.  A few more,
or, I would say, one more success of this kind, will not only be a
victory, but a very great one.  For a majority of 4631 to have been
reduced on this last occasion to 690 is no small thing to have been
accomplished.  It has been accomplished by two causes, or, I might
say, three perhaps.  One was a first-class candidate; the second was
hard-working constituents; the third--a very important one--was a
good cause.'  His Grace then referred to the Colonel's family as
holding an honoured place in the history of Midlothian for nearly six
hundred years, and to his own good qualities as a soldier who had
fought hard for his country's honour, and faithfully served his Queen.

{128}

Colonel Wauchope's reply was at once modest, vigorous, and humorous,
but our space will not permit us to give it in its entirety.  In his
most light-hearted bantering manner he referred to the consternation
of their Liberal opponents on hearing that Mr. Gladstone had only
been returned by a majority of 690.  'They said it must be a blunder;
there must be something wrong; a "one" dropped out from before the
"six"; it was absurd; the figure will be at least 1690.'  'Ah, but
they looked, and they better looked, but there was no number "one"
before the "six."  The fact was this, my friends, that Mr.
Gladstone's majority was down 4000, and so the news had to travel to
Dalmeny, where, I fancy, it was not received with great cordiality!'
After complimenting the committee for the manner in which they had
all exerted themselves, and a graceful acknowledgment to the ladies
who had also assisted, he concluded by thanking his supporters for
the great kindness he had experienced, and the great honour they had
done him, and sat down amid a perfect storm of applause, the large
audience once more rising to their feet, cheering to the echo.

One of the other speakers--Mr. Martin, manager of the works at New
Craighall--mentioned that the miners of Niddrie, who had supported
the Colonel with loyal devotion, were going to work on till they had
returned him as member for Midlothian.  And as an evidence of their
admiration, on the 17th December they also in their own humble way
honoured him with a banquet.  It was given in the schoolroom of the
village, and about a hundred and fifty warm sympathisers were
present, presided over by Mr. Martin.  It was in every way a
demonstration creditable to the gratitude of the men for many acts of
kindness shown to them in the past, and a manifestation of {129}
their personal esteem, which the Colonel was not slow to recognise
and appreciate.

[Sidenote: Wauchope and Gladstone]

A noteworthy feature of this contest between Colonel Wauchope and Mr.
Gladstone was the entire absence of personal animosity.  Both
candidates treated each other, as they were entitled to do, with the
utmost respect.  This is not always so in the heat of political
warfare.  But Wauchope had the good sense to avoid any reference to
his opponent, and for long Mr. Gladstone did not condescend to reply
to any strictures upon his policy.  When Wauchope had decided to
become a candidate for Midlothian, he went to Sir Robert Biddulph,
afterwards Governor of Gibraltar, and told him he would have to
canvass regularly until the next general election.  Sir Robert's
advice was wise:--'I told him,' said he, 'that he should never make
any personal attack on Gladstone, nor ever mention his name in his
public speeches.  I said, "Gladstone is so strong a man, and so
powerful a speaker, that he can tear you to pieces.  You should not,
therefore, give him the least opening for attacking you, but just act
as if no such man existed."  Some time after,' continues Sir Robert,
'he reminded me of that advice, and said he had scrupulously acted
upon it, so much so that Mr. Gladstone had never attacked him, and
had even spoken of him as a worthy and estimable man!'

Notwithstanding his military duties, of which he was far from being
forgetful, amid all the political excitement of 1892, Colonel
Wauchope, encouraged by the enthusiasm of his friends, and still
determined to uphold what he considered Constitutional principles,
though, at the same time, conscious of his own deficiencies,
continued his candidature for some time in view of the possibility of
another election soon.  Writing from Limerick Barracks {130} on 28th
July 1892 to a friend in Dalkeith who had sent him some complimentary
verses on the recent election, he says:--'Many thanks for your kind
letter.  It is such that repay me for any little trouble I may have
taken in the good old cause.  No one feels more than I do how unfit I
am in many ways for the position of candidate.  For instance, during
next month we are to be at field manoeuvres, and I am tied by the leg
during that time.  But Midlothian deals very tenderly with all my
wants--very much, I take it, that I am one of themselves.'

It was his strong opinion that the Liberal policy of the time was to
prove disastrous to the best interests of his country which made him
so keen an opponent of Mr. Gladstone.  Against that great statesman
he had not the slightest personal feeling.  Speaking to a friend
afterwards who was congratulating him upon his having so nearly been
returned to Parliament, he said, 'I never expected to win the seat,
_but I wanted to hash their batteries_!'  Before long it became
apparent, however, that it would be a needless waste of energy to
continue the struggle; and, besides this, other duties supervened,
and Colonel Wauchope saw fit to withdraw altogether from politics for
a season.




{131}

CHAPTER VIII

THE 73RD REGIMENT AT MARYHILL BARRACKS--INCIDENTS OF HOME
LIFE--MILITARY LIFE AT YORK--APPOINTMENT TO SOUDAN CAMPAIGN.


In the autumn of 1892 Colonel Wauchope's residence in Limerick came
to a close on his appointment to the command of the 73rd Perthshire
Regiment, or the 2nd Battalion of the Black Watch, then stationed at
Maryhill Barracks, Glasgow.  This well-earned promotion to a position
he had long aspired to occupy enabled him to be more frequently at
Niddrie than formerly.  During the twenty-seven years he had been
connected with the Black Watch, he had risen slowly but steadily from
the rank of subaltern through the various intermediate stages to the
first position, by dint of persevering effort and close application
to his military duties.  He was by no means a dilettante officer.  He
loved his profession, and he made it his life work, while the
enthusiasm with which he was inspired he imparted to those around
him.  We find this exemplified in a speech made at a large gathering
of the old members of the 42nd held in the Trades Hall, Glasgow, on
the 17th September, where he presided.  Many of those present had
been with him through the Ashanti and Soudan campaigns, as well as in
Cyprus, Malta, and Gibraltar, and in referring to former times he
{132} recalled their relationship with no little satisfaction.  He
felt, he said, as if he was back at Aldershot under his dear old
colonel, now Sir John M'Leod, and once more an ensign, and the
adjutant of the 42nd.  But let them not forget their comrades of the
73rd regiment.  Almost since the beginning of the century, the 73rd
had been part and parcel of the 42nd, having been indeed the second
battalion of the regiment.  That alliance had been a happy one.
Personally he had now served the second battalion for eighteen
months, and it had been to him a period of great pleasure in his
duties.  That which bound them together and gave them so much in
common was the glorious traditions of the 42nd.  Their hearts warmed
to each other and the old regiment as they thought of Waterloo and
Quatre Bras.  But it was not only traditions they had.  He saw men
before him who had fought in a European theatre of war, and who had
taken part in the great battle of the Alma, of which they were now
celebrating the anniversary.  He had spent twenty-seven years in the
old regiment, and the longer he was in it the better he loved it.  In
concluding an eloquent address, he said: 'The 42nd stood high in the
esteem of the Scottish people, for there was no regiment that
Scotland loved more than the "Auld Forty-twa," and well they might.
By sea and by land, at home and abroad, the 42nd had fought and
always deserved well of its country.  Our old regiment has become
renowned chiefly, I believe, because of the strict and stern yet good
discipline exercised by such commanders as Sir Daniel Cameron, Sir
John M'Leod, and others.  These men had always stood up for
discipline, and it was discipline that brought the soldier comfort,
whilst it was the reverse that brought disorder and crime, and
everything that was disagreeable.'

{133}

[Sidenote: 'Right-about wheel!']

The Colonel was not, however, always so successful as a speaker.  An
amusing incident is told of him when in command at Maryhill Barracks
which shows that an eloquent man may not always have command of his
tongue.  One morning on parade he purposed giving the men an address,
and from the demeanour of their colonel the men anticipated something
eloquent.  The genial Andrew, however, had only got the length of
'Men of the gallant 42nd,' when his tongue seemed to cleave to the
roof of his mouth.  Thrice did he make the attempt, and thrice did he
fail to make progress, until, exasperated with himself, he suddenly
exclaimed, to the astonishment of the regiment--'Men of the gallant
42nd, right-about wheel!'

But while the Colonel was strong in politics and diligent in the
discharge of barrack duties, he did not forget his old ancestral home
at Niddrie.  It was never his lot to make anything like a permanent
residence at Niddrie House, but so long as he was stationed either at
Maryhill or afterwards in Edinburgh Castle he embraced every
opportunity of making short visits home; and when home he never
failed to interest himself in the welfare of all in the
neighbourhood.  In the spring of 1893, being then in command in
Edinburgh Castle, he had more frequent opportunities of being among
'his ain folk,' and taking a more active interest in their welfare
than was formerly possible.  It is with almost a smile we read of his
being at home at that time, and attending a meeting mostly composed
of miners and labourers in the Niddrie School, to present prizes to
the members of the local Bowling Club, in whose success he took a
lively interest.  A social meeting held after this ceremony was
heartily enjoyed by all present, the Colonel entering freely into the
spirit of the occasion, making himself the gayest of {134} the gay
and 'everybody's body,' among men, women, and children.  As one has
well said, 'he had a magnetism about him which not only made him the
friend of all, but made all his friends.'

It will be long before the people of Niddrie and New Craighall
villages forget his kindness to them.  One and all while he lived
regarded him with pride, affection, and gratitude.  Nor is this to be
wondered at, for he held their loyalty and friendship by simple and
unaffected acts of kindness and helpfulness, never making them feel
that his friendship was an act of condescension, but rather the
outcome of a warm heart and a generous nature.  Their acknowledgment
of his services when occasion arose was always spontaneous and
sincere.

This was strikingly exemplified on the occasion of Colonel Wauchope's
marriage in 1893 to Miss Jean Muir, the daughter of the venerable
Principal of Edinburgh University.  On the Saturday previous, the
villagers and others turned out in full force, and by their gifts as
well as by their presence showed how gratified they were with the
lady of his choice, and how their good wishes went out towards them
both.  Two bands headed the procession to the mansion-house, and when
the lawn was reached the Colonel was presented in name of them all
with a silver punch-bowl, on a polished cannel-coal stand taken from
the Niddrie coal-pits.  The presents from the school children, the
tenants on the estate, and other incidents of the day testified
unmistakably in the same way to the cordial relations subsisting
between the laird and his neighbours and dependants.

'A better man never lived' was the terse estimate of one of the
villagers when speaking of him lately, and the echo of it will long
keep his memory green.

{135}

[Sidenote: Charlie Egan]

One touching incident illustrating his goodness of heart is told by
the Rev. George Dodds, the Free Church Minister of Liberton, as
occurring about this time.  When in command at Maryhill Barracks the
Colonel one day inspecting the hospital had his attention directed to
a boy--one of two brothers in the band of the Black Watch--who was
dying of consumption, and it touched the soldier's heart.  Finding
out that the boy was an orphan, he had him removed to a room in his
own house, the Colonel himself accompanying the lad from Glasgow to
Niddrie, where every possible attention was paid to him.  Dr. A.
Balfour of Portobello was asked to look after the case, and it was
the Colonel's wish that a nurse should attend him.  The lad, however,
got so attached to the housekeeper at Niddrie--one of the kindest and
most faithful of servants--that he would have no other attention than
hers.  During all the illness of the brave little chap, no one knows
but the kindly nurse, the doctor, and the minister, the Colonel's
tenderness and anxiety and unstinted generosity towards his little
friend.  When at length after some weeks he died, it was a sight not
to be forgotten, how at the close of the funeral service he stood
weeping at the head of the coffin which was laid on trestles in the
hall.  It was a stormy wintry day at the end of April, the snow lying
thick on the ground; but, following the bier, he walked uncovered
through the snow with all the reverence of a bereaved man to the
grave in the little private burying-ground in the Niddrie policies,
where the young soldier, whose closing weeks of life he had soothed
so tenderly, was laid to rest by his comrades from Edinburgh Castle.

Poor little Charlie Egan, with only his fifteen summers over his
head, truly found in his commanding officer one {136} who was touched
with the truest Christian sympathy, and acted well towards him the
part of the Good Samaritan.  Such conduct is a noble example.  It is
the secret of lasting popularity.  It is more,--it is the secret of
true happiness.

In 1894 occurred a protracted strike among the colliers throughout
the country.  The Niddrie coal-works were affected by it, and for
seventeen weeks the men were out of employment, and their families
suffering the severest hardship.  On this question he expressed
himself at a later date most forcibly in these words:--'I do not know
anything to a patriotic mind more terrible for the country, and bad
for it, than anything in the shape of strikes--those industrial wars
which the country has witnessed and which had been an evil thing in
every way.  I know it will be said that I am a man of war, and that I
love war, and all that sort of thing.  Never was there a greater
fable.  Though I have never had to stand on a great European field of
battle, I have seen too much of war in all its horrible aspects not
to hate it in every sense of the word.  In the same way with those
industrial wars, there is nothing more deplorable and nothing which
has tended more to unhappy homes, and all the consequences thereof.'
But the Niddrie miners were in sore straits, and a deputation of them
went to the Colonel to lay their case before him, and they did not
appeal in vain.  He told them very plainly he had no sympathy
whatever with the strike; 'but man, Tam,' addressing the leader of
the deputation, 'I would rather do anything than see the women and
weans starving,' and there and then he promised to give one pound
daily to keep the soup-kitchen going, so that they might at least
have one good meal a day.  Not only so, but as long as the strike
lasted, vegetables in abundance were supplied from the Niddrie House
gardens.

{137}

[Sidenote: The country gentleman]

In New Craighall there is a large reading-room and bagatelle-room.
Many years ago the building was erected by the Wauchope family for a
school, and was used as such up till 1896, when it was superseded by
the large school erected by the Board at Niddrie Mill.  Niddrie
bowling-green, gifted to the villagers lately by Sir Charles
Dalrymple, has been a great boon to the men; and Colonel Wauchope
contributed largely to the expense connected with its formation.  A
bleaching-green in the centre of the village--part of it fenced off
for football; the local football club; the local brass band--these
were all objects of his liberality.  Was a site for a church or a
chapel wanted, it was given ungrudgingly, and his grounds were thrown
open for Sunday-school excursions and picnics during the summer
months.  In cases of accident to any of the miners, he had an
ambulance waggon ready at the collieries, and in many other ways he
indicated his interest in the villagers.

Similar instances of generosity among the people of Town and Kirk
Yetholm--where the other family estate is situated--made him, we are
told, the 'admired of all admirers.'  There he bestowed large
monetary help in providing better water supply and sanitary
requirements for these villages.  In Yetholm district he was an
open-handed benefactor, and will probably be longer remembered as
such than for his warlike achievements.  And all this kindness was
done without ostentation.  It was the outcome of a noble and generous
disposition.  'No man is truly great who is not gentle,' it has been
wisely remarked, for a gentleman must be kind and considerate for
others; and though the work of a soldier is to fight, and if need be
to kill, he is all the stronger in his hour of struggle against the
enemy that he carries within him a gentle heart.

{138}

Colonel Wauchope's heart was in the right place, and his influence
was consequently far-reaching.  It is told of him that one day he had
as a companion in a country walk an ex-brother officer, not very
popular among the private soldiers.  As they sauntered along, they
forgathered with a big boisterous bully who had been drummed out of
his regiment, taking with him a rankling ill-will against this
officer.  He gave vent to his wrath against the Colonel's companion,
and threatened that he would 'do' for him, showing at the same time
every disposition to carry his threat into effect; but Wauchope
promptly stepped between the two, when the rowdy somewhat changed his
manner, saying, 'Captain, I would not lift a hand against so gallant
an officer as you; it is lucky for Mr. ---- that you are with him,'
whereupon the Colonel lectured him upon the impropriety of his
conduct, and with sundry other good advices parted from him by
leaving a silver coin in his hand.  This was too much for the man,
and he burst into tears.

Nor was he above doing a kindly action, even though asked in not the
most polite fashion.  Once he happened to be visiting his friend Sir
Charles Dalrymple, at Newhailes, dressed in plain rustic costume.  He
had scarcely entered the grounds, and closed the gate behind him,
when he heard a shrill voice calling out, 'Hae, man! come and open
the gate, will ye?'  Looking round, Colonel Wauchope descried two
fish-women with their creels on their backs, vainly endeavouring to
effect an entrance.  On the request being repeated, he at once turned
back, politely opened the gate, and walked on!  They had taken him
for one of the workmen, and were rather disconcerted when they
afterwards discovered who had been acting the part of porter for them.

{139}

Such acts of courtesy came natural to Colonel Wauchope: they were not
put on for occasion.  Whether in openhanded generosity and
hospitality, or in the mere opening of a gate, he exemplified
Emerson's idea of what a gentleman should be.  As that writer
expresses it, 'When I view the fine gentleman with regard to his
manners, methinks I see him modest without bashfulness; frank and
affable without impertinence; obliging and complaisant without
servility; cheerful and in good humour without noise.  These amiable
qualities are not easily obtained, neither are there many men that
have a faculty to excel this way.  A finished gentleman is perhaps
the most uncommon of all the characters in life.'

[Sidenote: The miners' strike]

Colonel Wauchope stood well by the miners through their long enforced
idleness, with all its concomitant troubles, and when the time of
distress was at last over and the pits had resumed work, the men
determined to show their appreciation of his conduct by a public
recognition of their esteem.  On the 3rd May 1895, a large gathering
took place in the New Craighall schoolroom, presided over by the
manager of the works, when an illuminated address expressive of their
gratitude, affection, and admiration, was presented to him in a
silver-mounted casket.  That he valued such an expression of
affection from 'his own people,' as he liked to call them, goes
without saying.  In acknowledging the gift he said: 'This address
will stand foremost among our household gods.  On the face of it is a
view of the old house of Niddrie, where for centuries my forefathers
have lived before me.  I will say that in distant lands and in
moments of danger, my thoughts have always been of my old home and
the people of Niddrie and this neighbourhood.  And as to my poor
services, I feel proud when they are brought to the {140} notice of
my own people in my own country.  And you may depend, that when the
hour of danger is, if there is one thing that supports me in that
hour, it is the knowledge that those at home are thinking about me,
and should I fall, that their thoughts would be kindly towards me
when I am no more.'  Referring to a passage in the address that spoke
of his relationship as owner of the soil to his dependants being ever
of a kindly nature, he said: 'I would be no man at all if I were not
pleased to hear that.'  Then as for the unfortunate strike some
months ago: 'I knew there were difficulties, and I stepped forward in
a small way to try and help my countrymen and women.  As for strikes,
I don't like them.  They are not good for our pockets, they are not
good for our tempers, and they are unfortunate in every respect.  It
is an ill wind that blows nobody good, however, and that strike has
done this good for me--it has given me this presentation, which shall
for ever be valued.  The strike will also have done good to the
community, inasmuch as it has shown that when difficulties are around
us, and trials and tribulations come, we can stand shoulder to
shoulder.'  After a graceful allusion to Mrs. Wauchope as one
desirous of doing her duty, and who in the address had been called
his 'Gentle Consort,' the Colonel concluded amid great applause by
thanking them all for the great kindness which had prompted such a
meeting.

It does one good in these times, when capital and labour are too
often in antagonism, to find such cordiality of affection and
identity of interest.

[Sidenote: Departure from Edinburgh]

After three years' residence in Edinburgh Castle, the and Battalion
of the Royal Highlanders (Black Watch) received orders in the autumn
of 1896 to take up their quarters in the city of York, and
accordingly on 26th {141} September they left Edinburgh, where they
had so long enjoyed the esteem of the citizens for their excellence
of conduct.  Colonel Wauchope and his gallant Highlanders paraded at
seven in the morning at the Castle Esplanade, and although one
hundred and seventy of the regiment were at the time at Ballater as a
guard of honour to Her Majesty, the muster was five hundred and fifty
strong.  It spoke volumes for their discipline and good conduct, that
Colonel Wauchope was able to say as the regiment was addressed before
their departure, that 'there was not a single absentee from parade,
nor yet a prisoner.'

The Black Watch were garrisoned in York for the following eighteen
months, and both officers and men gained for themselves in that
ancient cathedral city much popular favour.  Effective discipline and
systematic drill were never relaxed, and what they might lose in ease
or pleasure was compensated by admirable efficiency.

In the Sussex military manoeuvres of August and September 1897,
Colonel Wauchope with a brigade of the Black Watch went from York to
take a part in the proceedings.  Joining the force of General
Burnett, which had fallen back from Waltham, and had bivouacked
overnight near Arundel, Wauchope's timely reinforcement enabled him
to retrace his steps westwards.  Passing through the ducal Arundel
Park, he struck across Houghton Forest, deploying his battalions as
the area of conflict neared, and encountered the opposing force under
General Gosset, when some smart skirmishing (continued for several
days) took place at Burton Down, Dignor Hill, and Bury Hill.  The
attempt to drive Burnett and Wauchope back over the river Arun,
though gallantly attempted, was ultimately declared by the umpires to
have {142} failed.  Wauchope and his brigade were reported as having
done splendidly.

[Illustration: GENERAL WAUCHOPE.  _From a Photograph by arrangement
with Mr Thomas Kemp, Dalkeith._]

In such exercises Wauchope was an adept.  In military science he made
it a point to be thoroughly conversant not only with the details of
drill, but in general strategy, to be able to grip a given situation
with comprehensive tact.  A born soldier, he instinctively realised
what was the right thing to do and the right time to attempt it.  Nor
was he the man to ask his men to do anything that he would not
himself do, or take a part in.  When in Edinburgh Castle it was his
habit, in order to keep the regiment up to the fighting standard of
physical endurance, to march them out a nine or ten miles round of
country, and that in all sorts of weather; sunshine or rain
apparently made no difference.  Frequently have we seen him swinging
along at the head of his men, sometimes on horseback, but more often
on foot, over roads inches deep with mud.  Like most favourite
officers, he had his pet name.  As we have already said, the name by
which he was familiarly known in the Black Watch was 'Red Mick.'  One
day the regiment had been ordered out for a march, and in passing a
group of the men the Colonel happened to overhear one of them say,
'Red Mick will be going to ride to-day.'  The regiment was in due
time drawn up on parade, and addressed by their commander as to the
order of march; then looking the man who had made the remark straight
in the face, he finished up by saying, 'but to-day Red Mick will
walk!'

[Sidenote: Military life at York]

While the regiment was in York, Wauchope took a deep interest in the
benevolent institutions of the city, and specially in the Scotch
community.  He was the President of the St. Andrew's Society, which,
through his active interest in its affairs, greatly increased in
numbers and {143} influence.  'He always,' says one who knew him
there, 'let it be known that he was a Scotsman, and was proud of his
country.  The stirring speeches that he made before the St. Andrew's
Society are still remembered with delight; and as an evidence of the
regard in which his memory is still held there, that Society is about
to erect a tablet in the Presbyterian church to the memory of the
officers and men of the Black Watch who have since fallen in battle.'

It was noticed also that the same chivalrous feeling of relationship
existed between him and his men as existed formerly between a
Highland chief and his clan.  His interest in them and their families
was ever showing itself in kindly visits to the married quarters of
the barracks, in order to look after the welfare of the women and
children, so as to increase their comfort.  Fêtes and social meetings
were not unfrequent, and at Christmas time it was his custom to have
a well-laden Christmas tree, on which were suitable presents for the
children, while the mothers had welcome little gifts of money
distributed to them.  All this, says the Rev. Alexander Stirling,
minister of the Presbyterian church, York, was at his own private
expense, and must have cost him not less than £50 on each occasion.
In spite of the attractive splendours of a grand cathedral, Colonel
Wauchope preferred to worship according to his accustomed manner in
the simpler form of the Presbyterian church.  There, too, by his
arrangement, the regiment worshipped in force, and he always insisted
upon a full complement of officers accompanying the men.  Not only
so, but, as Mr. Stirling informs us, Mrs. Wauchope and the officers
of the Black Watch were in many ways helpful to him and his
congregation, taking a part in much of their church work, and showing
their loyalty to their Presbyterian principles in many ways.

{144}

In July 1898, Colonel Wauchope was selected by Lord Wolseley to
command a brigade in the expedition then being organised under
General (now Lord) Kitchener for the reconquest of the Soudan.  The
42nd regiment was not ordered out for this service, and so the time
had come when, after thirty-three years of close connection with them
both in peace and in war, that connection must for a time be broken.
One of his brother officers, writing afterwards of that period and
the grief that was in every heart over the prospect of losing him,
says: 'The send-off he received at York when he left will never be
effaced from the memory of those who took part in it.  I have never
seen Scotch soldiers exhibit any such emotion, or give way so
thoroughly to their feelings.  They knew whom they were losing; they
realised their loss, and gave vent accordingly.'

At the same time, the circumstances, if touching, were not without a
dash of the ludicrous; but they show how warmly attached the Black
Watch were to one who from the rank of subaltern had risen steadily
to be their colonel, and was now to leave them for the command of a
brigade.  Many a man among them wished he had the chance to accompany
him.

[Sidenote: Send-off from York]

The regiment was at the time camped out for summer quarters at
Strensall camp, about five miles from York.  On the evening of a hot
July day, when Colonel Wauchope was to leave for the Soudan, there
was an open mess among the officers, and the health and prosperity of
their departing colonel was enthusiastically drunk.  It was arranged
that he was to go south by the midnight train at York, and as the
evening hours sped on, the regiment as usual retired to their tents
to rest for the night, after tuck of drum.  They did not, however,
retire to {145} sleep, for no sooner were the wheels of the Colonel's
carriage heard than there was a general move.  It was a little after
twelve o'clock, and the men were stripped and in bed.  But in an
instant every tent was astir, and like a swarm of bees the whole
regiment broke loose.  Every tent belched forth its quota of excited
men, and without taking time to dress they had surrounded the
carriage, cheering, and enthusiastically shaking hands with their
departing chief.  Many of them, with only their nightshirts on, ran
after the carriage a considerable distance, still cheering as they
went along!  It was such a send-off as few officers ever experienced.

It is a striking testimony to the impression made during these two
years upon the community of the city of York by this good Scotsman
and his regiment, that at the unveiling of a handsome marble memorial
in the Presbyterian Church, Prior Street, on the 26th November 1900,
all classes were represented, and the Dean of York gave expression to
the thoughts of many when he said that, although he never saw General
Wauchope until he came to York, and during his residence there with
his regiment it was not very often they met, 'yet there was in some
characters a sort of magnetic attraction so that one felt at once
drawn to them because they were sterling material, true metal.  It
would be impossible to be in General Wauchope's company, and be
associated in any way with him, or to hear very much about him,
without feeling that he was not only a soldier of the Crown but
eminently a soldier of the Cross.  It was right that his memory
should be perpetuated in York, it was right that it should be
perpetuated in that house of God which he specially identified
himself with, and which specially belonged to his nationality.'




{146}

CHAPTER IX

THE SOUDAN--BATTLES OF ATBARA AND OMDURMAN--ARRIVAL HOME--RECEPTION
AT NIDDRIE----DEGREE OF LL.D.--PAROCHIAL DUTIES--PARLIAMENTARY
CONTEST FOR SOUTH EDINBURGH.


Once more Wauchope found himself on the way to the front for active
service, this time back to the scene of his former exploits in the
Soudan.  Matters there, ever since the withdrawal of the British and
Egyptian troops in 1885, when the then all-conquering Mahdi took
Khartoum and slew the gallant General Gordon, had gone on from bad to
worse.  Over-running the whole valley of the Nile, the Egyptian
boundary-line had been much circumscribed, and was now fixed as far
north as Wady Halfa, the prophet holding almost undisputed sway over
the whole Soudan, except that part of it contiguous to the Red Sea in
the neighbourhood of Suakim.  On the death of the Mahdi in 1885, his
tomb at Omdurman became a sanctuary, round which the faithful
gathered themselves.  Under the sway of his successor, Khalifa
Abdullahi of the Baggara tribe, cruelty and oppression ground down
with iron hand every neighbouring tribe.  Military despotism stamped
out commerce, and trade and agriculture; the people were ruined, and
slaughter and devastation ruled where formerly there had been
prosperity and peace.  {147} Even Egypt was not safe from the inroads
of the Dervish host, attempts being made several times to invade its
borders; but Tokar was their utmost limit.  In 1892, Colonel Horatio
Herbert Kitchener recaptured that town, but no further attempt was
made to regain lost ground till 1896, when that officer, now
Major-General and Sirdar, or Commander of the Egyptian army, received
orders to advance up the Nile for the reconquest of the Soudan.  The
days of Egypt's weakness were past, for during the interval between
this and Tel-el-Kebir, when the then wretched Egyptian army was
smashed to pieces, English officers had been actively licking into
shape a new native force.  Drill and discipline, combined with
growing confidence in their officers, had in those years built up an
army able and willing to dare anything.  The Sirdar was ready to
fight the Khalifa, but he realised that in an invasion of the Soudan
the real enemy to be faced was the Soudan itself--'its barrenness
which refuses food, and its vastness which paralyses transport.'

These were the problems to be overcome by the general who would
conquer the Soudan and plant his flag on the walls of Khartoum.

Science and engineering skill came to the rescue, and with these
under the guidance of a marvellous military genius that took in every
situation, and turned it to his advantage, the enterprise was
ultimately crowned with success.  Hitherto military movements in the
Soudan had been either by camels and weary foot trudging, or by boats
on the Nile.  Kitchener determined upon Wolseley's idea of crossing
the desert between Wady Halfa and Abu-Hammed, but not by camels.  He
resolved to do it by rail, and to build the railway as they marched.
It was a bold stroke.  This is how it was done.  Starting from {148}
Wady Halfa, a surveying party set out for ten miles or so, making a
rough survey of the lie of the ground, marking as they went the
proposed course; about five miles behind the surveying parties came
working parties 1200 strong, levelling and embanking where necessary.
Two miles behind these came 550 platelayers, and half a mile after
them a gang of 400 men to lift, straighten, and ballast the line.
One mile behind these again came 400 men to put on the finishing
touches, and the line was complete, but ever progressing to its
ultimate terminus, carrying forward its own materials of rails and
sleepers, as well as supplies for troops on the march.  The credit of
this great work was largely due to the young lieutenants of the Royal
Engineers under the direction of Lieutenant Girouard, a Canadian
officer.

[Sidenote: On the Atbara]

It was steady, plodding work; slow, perhaps, as a fighting campaign,
but every mile of advance the army made sure of its position, and was
kept within touch of Cairo.  The campaign of 1897 found the greater
part of the Sirdar's force as far as Ed-Damer, seven miles beyond the
junction of the Nile and the Atbara river.

Here a strong camp was formed and preparations were made for
encountering the enemy who were massing some distance up the Nile at
Matemneh, under Mahmoud, the son of the Khalifa, and old Osman Digna.
These joined forces at Shendi, about half-way between Berber and
Khartoum, their strength being about eighteen thousand men.

General Kitchener, leading and directing every movement, returned
from Cairo in December 1897, having arranged with the British
Government for the sending out of a small British force to assist the
Egyptian troops already in the field.

{149}

These were at once granted, and the reserve British force at Cairo,
consisting of the 1st Warwicks, 1st Lincolns, and 1st Cameron
Highlanders, left for the front, their places being taken by several
regiments sent out from England.

With such generals as Hunter and Hector Macdonald the Sirdar had
worked his way up the Nile valley, overcoming all difficulties, with
his Egyptian force of some ten thousand men and forty-six guns.  The
arrival of the British Division in two brigades under General Gatacre
in March and April added largely to the strength of the force.  The
command of the First Brigade was afterwards given to Colonel
Wauchope, now promoted to the rank of Brigadier-General.  How
different his journey up the Nile on this occasion from his
experience fourteen years before with the weary whale-boats!  Now,
thanks to the energy of the Sirdar, he could travel to Berber in a
saloon carriage.  Speaking of this afterwards, he said he was never
so struck in his life as when he saw that railway across the desert,
which did so much for the expedition.

Before his arrival at the front, however, one brilliant fight had
taken place.  Mahmoud had been discovered securely, as he thought,
entrenched some seventeen miles up the river from Abador, or about
forty from Atbara camp; and it was not fitting, notwithstanding the
difficulties of transport by camels for twelve thousand men, that so
large a British force should sit down within so short a distance of
an enemy and not attempt to drive him out of his position.  The
forward order was given, and on 8th April, after a long night-march,
the troops found themselves facing Mahmoud's zareba at Nakheila, on
the Atbara.

The story of the attack has been given with all the graphic skill of
an eye-witness, by G. W. Steevens in his {150} book, _With Kitchener
to Khartoum_.  When the sun rose behind the Sirdar's men, it revealed
a stockade made up of timber, and a ten-foot hedge of camel-thorn,
with entrenchments behind--a formidable enough obstacle to face.
Without delay arrangements were made for the attack.  The enemy's
base rested on the river, and the Sirdar, determined that he should
not escape, formed his force in a semi-circle round him.  At 6.20 the
first gun announced the advent of battle, and for an hour and twenty
minutes Mahmoud's zareba was pounded with shot, shell, and rocket,
after which the Egyptian and British troops advanced to the attack
all along the line.  Maxwell's, Macdonald's, and Hunter's Egyptians
deployed on the right.  Gatacre's British Division had the Cameron
Highlanders in the place of honour, formed in line along their whole
front; then, in columns of their eight companies, the Lincolns on the
right, the Seaforths in the centre, and the Warwicks--two companies
short--on the left.  The orders to these were, not to advance till it
was certain the Dervish cavalry, hovering to the left of the zareba,
would not charge in flank.  Behind all was Lewis's brigade ready for
any emergency that might occur.  Stirring addresses having been made
by the leading officers, the Sirdar called upon the men to 'remember
Gordon,' and all being ready, 'the word came, and the men sprang up.
The squares shifted into fighting formations; at one impulse, in one
superb sweep, nearly twelve thousand men moved forward towards the
enemy.  All England and all Egypt, and the flower of the black lands
beyond, Birmingham and the West Highlands, the half-regenerated
children of the earth's earliest civilisation, and grinning savages
from the uttermost swamps of Equatoria, muscle and machinery, lord
and larrikin, {151} Balliol and the Board School, the Sirdar's brain
and the camel's back--all welded into one, the awful war machine went
forward into action.'

[Sidenote: Attack on the Zareba]

The Camerons no sooner got the word to advance than, with a wild
rush, the pipers meanwhile playing 'The March of the Cameron Men,'
they made for the zareba some three hundred yards ahead.  Forward and
forward, midst a rain of bullets, they reached the hedge of
camel-thorn.  In a few moments it was torn to pieces and scattered
like brushwood, Gatacre being among the first to lay hands on the
obstruction, and the Highlanders were inside the stockade and in the
trenches, where now sprang out of the earth dusty, black, half-naked
shapes, running and turning to shoot, but running away.  'It was a
wild confusion of Highlanders, purple tartan, and black green too,
for now the Seaforths had brought their perfect columns through the
teeth of the fire, and were charging in at the gap.'  The enemy
scarcely waited to fight, so impetuous was the rush upon them, and
they fled in the utmost confusion for the river, where they were cut
down by the pursuing cavalry, and General Lewis's half brigade of
Egyptians.

In the attack on the right, the Egyptian troops, led by British
officers under Generals Hunter, Maxwell, and Macdonald, behaved with
great gallantry, carrying all before them.  The ground was easier on
their side than that covered by Gatacre's men, and they entered the
zareba a few minutes before the Highlanders, not a man flinching from
the encounter.  The battle of the Atbara--thanks to British
discipline and drill--definitely placed the blacks and the once
contemned Egyptians in the ranks of the very best troops in the
world.  In forty minutes the Dervish host had been driven out of
their lair, thousands of them had been killed, and four thousand,
including their leader {152} Mahmoud, were prisoners in the Sirdar's
hands.  The way was now so far open to Khartoum, but the opportunity
was not yet.

Reserves and supplies were needed, and a strong base had still to be
secured before the final advance on the Khalifa's capital could be
attempted.  The whole force, British and Egyptian, accordingly
retraced their steps down the Atbara river to El Hudi, where they
struck across the desert to the various camps they had formerly
occupied at Kenur, Darmali, Assilem, Berber, and Fort Atbara, at the
junction of the rivers.

The 1st Brigade of British, viz. the Camerons, the Lincolns,
Seaforths, and Maxim battery resumed their quarters at Darmali, where
they remained throughout the summer.  By the month of August,
however, when Wauchope joined them, casualties in action and deaths
and invalidings from sickness had seriously affected the strength of
the brigade, though officers and men upon the whole stood the climate
well.  'The sick list had never touched six per cent.  There were not
fifty graves in the cemetery; and most of the faces at the mess table
were familiar.'  The Lincolns, who had come up over 1100 strong,
still had 980; the other three battalions were each about 750 strong,
and the Warwicks were expecting a further draft of men.  The total
strength of Wauchope's brigade would thus come to nearly 3500 men.
With eager expectation they now awaited the order to advance on
Khartoum.

[Sidenote: Advance on Khartoum]

The forward movement began on 3rd August, regiment after regiment
first concentrating at Atbara fort, then being shipped by steamer up
the Nile to Shabluka, where they were to reform and make the
remainder of the journey in six marches on the west bank to Omdurman.
Even with several steamers at the Sirdar's disposal it {153} was a
tedious business, and occupied nearly a month.  Wauchope's brigade
passed up in the steamers on the 14th August, a four days' voyage,
and on the 23rd, when paraded with the and Brigade, they were
reported as 'in splendid condition.'

On the 25th August, the 1st Brigade marched out of Wad Hamed, and the
scene is described by one who saw it as a most imposing spectacle.
The four battalions of which it was composed moved off with their
baggage at the bugle-call, taking the road in four parallel columns.
'Many of the men were bearded, and all were tanned with the sun,
acclimatised by a summer in the country, hardened by perpetual
labours, and confident from the recollection of victory--a
magnificent force, which any man might be proud to accompany into the
field.'  General Wauchope's men were worthy of their commander, and
it was, we may be sure, with no little elation that he stepped out
with them that day on the way to their final triumph.

Keeping his forces well in hand, the Sirdar had the whole army
encamped at Wadi Abid on the evening of the 29th, the British
Division marching in by moonlight.  They were now within twenty-eight
miles of Omdurman, and the two following days' marches brought them
within touch of the enemy and in sight of the Mahdi's tomb.

The 2nd of September saw the last stand for Mahdism and its complete
overthrow.

Resting their base upon the river, where they were supported by five
gun-boats, the British formed their camp within a few miles of
Omdurman, the Sirdar taking the precaution to entrench in case of
surprise.  Early in the morning the Khalifa brought out his whole
force, computed to be about fifty thousand men, making a dead {154}
onset upon the British position.  If overpowering numbers could have
achieved victory he had it in his grasp.

But British coolness and pluck won the day.  The Dervish host on
horseback swept the plain with a rush that no infantry could have
withstood.  'They came very fast, and they came very straight; and
then presently they came no further.  With a crash the bullets leaped
out of the British rifles,' Egyptians, Englishmen, and Highlanders
pouring out death as fast as they could load and press trigger; while
shrapnel whistled and Maxims growled savagely.

[Sidenote: Battle of Omdurman]

We need not describe the details of the fighting.  The Khalifa's
attack was speedily turned into a rout, though many a brave stand was
made by the Dervish host.  Attacked on two sides, the British force
gradually spread itself out like an opening fan, under admirable
handling by their generals.  At a critical point in the engagement,
when Generals Hunter and Macdonald in the front were being threatened
by an outflanking movement of the enemy's cavalry, Hunter sent for
Wauchope's 1st Brigade to fill the gap between Macdonald on the right
and Lewis on the left.  The request went to General Gatacre first
instead of the Sirdar; but with the soldier's instinct he immediately
set the Brigade in motion.  Wauchope, cool as a statue, took in the
situation at once, and moved his men forward as if on parade, while
the Lincolns and the Warwicks under his command--said to be the best
shooting regiments in the British army--did great execution, and
effectually kept the enemy at bay.  They saved the position, for, as
one correspondent has said, 'It was the very crux and crisis of the
fight.  If Macdonald went, Lewis on his left, and Collinson and the
supporting camel-corps and the newly returned cavalry, all on his
right or {155} rear must all go too.'  Exposed to a withering fire,
the enemy were unable to withstand the steady discipline of our men.
Defeated on all sides, the Khalifa turned and fled.  Then was the
time for our cavalry.  With a dash the 21st Lancers made for the
retreating foe, pursuing and slaughtering up to the walls of
Omdurman.  The bravery of the Dervishes was unquestionable.  They
literally threw themselves upon the British lines, only to be
overwhelmed in a common ruin.  Over 11,000 of the enemy were killed,
16,000 wounded, and 4000 were taken prisoners, and this by an army
numbering not more than 22,000 men.  On the Anglo-Egyptian side the
losses were comparatively light, killed and wounded not amounting to
above 500.

General Wauchope was fortunate on this occasion in coming out of the
engagement without a scratch.  In some respects the battle of
Omdurman has been described as 'a less brilliant affair than the
Atbara.  On the other hand it was more complex, more like a modern
battle.  The Atbara took more fighting, Omdurman more generalship.
Success in each was complete and crushing.'  Mahdism was no more.  It
died well.  'It had earned its death by its iniquities, it had
condoned its iniquities by its death.'  Gordon was avenged.  And not
only so, it was the dawn of a new era for the long down-trodden
Soudan, so that it might in future be a country fit to live in.

We have already referred to General Wauchope's attachment to Scottish
Presbyterianism, and told how loyally and consistently he adhered to
the Church of his fathers.  From the days when he was an ensign, it
was known among his brother officers as a _casus belli_ to speak
slightingly to him of his Church.  He would stand up for
Presbyterianism, and would suffer for it if necessary, when its
claims were in danger of being thrust into the background.  A
difficulty {156} of this kind arose after the taking of Omdurman, and
it is interesting to note how he acted.  Orders had been given to all
the chaplains, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, and Anglican, for a
combined Gordon Memorial Service at Khartoum.  The Anglican chaplain
in Wauchope's division intimated, however, that he would take no part
in it if the Presbyterian chaplain were to share in the function.
The General used what persuasion he could to move the chaplain to a
broader view of things, declaring that he would not displace the
Presbyterian, whom he considered one of the best of men.  He was, he
said, a Presbyterian himself, along with most of his regiment.  At
last, when persuasion failed, and the Anglican still held his point,
the General said, 'then there is nothing for me but to report you to
my General of Division.'  When General Gatacre heard the story he
reported the affair to the Sirdar, who called the three
chaplains--Presbyterian, Anglican, and Roman Catholic--and said
laconically, something like this: 'You are each under orders, and the
man who disobeys must fall to the rear.'  This settled the question;
all of them took a part.  The Memorial Service and the formal entry
into Omdurman and Khartoum, taken part in by all the troops, were
most impressive spectacles.  These over, arrangements were at once
made for the withdrawal of the greater part of the army.

[Sidenote: Welcome home]

The troops returned immediately down the Nile, the British regiments
being shipped for England, where they arrived in the early part of
October.  A hearty welcome greeted their arrival, all classes of
society vying with one another in heaping honours upon them.

General Wauchope hurried home so soon as he was relieved of his
official duties, and after a short visit to {157} Yetholm, where he
was received with great enthusiasm, he and Mrs. Wauchope set out for
Niddrie on Monday, 10th October, by train from Kelso.

It was only on the Saturday previous that the villagers of New
Craighall heard that the General was to return, but short as was the
time for preparation, the determination to give him a hearty welcome
was so enthusiastically proceeded with that when he did reach it, the
rather quiet and dreary exterior of the village presented quite a
festive appearance.  Triumphal arches, flags, and streamers floated
in the breeze, and wreaths of flowers and evergreens were everywhere
visible.  It was the home-coming of a victor, beloved by his
neighbours, and well known beyond the limits of his demesne.

At the Newhailes station, which was also gaily adorned, the General
and Mrs. Wauchope were received on alighting from the train by quite
a crowd of friends, among others being Sir Charles Dalrymple and the
Misses Dalrymple, Mrs. Arbuthnot and Miss Muir, Councillor and Mrs.
Cranston, Edinburgh, Rev. A. Prentice, Rev. R. Burnett, Liberton,
Mrs. General Hoggan, and Ex-Provost Young, Loanhead, with the whole
village, men, women, and children at their back.

It was a good-humoured, enthusiastic crowd, and at a convenient part
of the road the horses were unyoked from his carriage and their
places supplied by hundreds of willing miners, who dragged the
carriage up to the gate of Niddrie Marischal, where it was given over
to the tenantry.

The procession was a long one, and was headed by the school children,
preceded by the local pipe band.  Then came the Niddrie brass band,
playing 'See the Conquering Hero comes,' and after them appeared the
members of {158} the 'A. G. Wauchope' Lodge of Shepherds, bearing
aloft their banner with his portrait on it.  The incidents of the
march were many.  Some were amusing, some were pathetic, but all told
of the loyalty and enthusiasm of the people among whom the General
had his home.  Bunting was displayed on all hands.  Women and
children cheered vociferously.  At the square of the village the
first halt was made, and an address of welcome in name of the
villagers was presented by Mr. Robert Wilson, one of their number, in
which expression was made of their pride in the distinguished place
the General had held in the Soudan war, of their joy at his safe
return from a battlefield where the mention of his services by the
Sirdar in his despatches for the special consideration of the Queen
had caused them the utmost gratification.

[Sidenote: Lord Kitchener, the Sirdar]

General Wauchope, who was apparently unprepared for such a
manifestation of public feeling, made the following reply:--'I can
assure you that the splendid reception you have accorded me is one
which I shall never forget.  I know very well that much of it is
owing to the fact that we have been neighbours now for many a long
year, and there is nothing that gave me greater pride and
satisfaction than being told two or three years ago that the people
of New Craighall looked upon me as being one of themselves.  In
addition to that, there is another feeling that has prompted you in
this reception, and it is that in me you recognised one--a humble
one, perhaps, but still one--of those who tried to serve his country
under, perhaps, difficult circumstances; and something is also due to
the fact that we have been completely successful in planting our
standards on the ruined palaces of Khartoum.  At Yetholm I said, and
I am going to say it again, that fact alone would be a great gain to
civilisation and to the world.  {159} If the Dervish power had been
continued for any length of time, hundreds and, perhaps, hundreds of
thousands of people who in the future will have a chance of living in
comfort and peace, would never have been able to live at all.  It was
a power based on murder, rapine, and cruelty, and it was our bounden
duty to put an end to that power, because Great Britain was
responsible for the condition of things that existed in that part of
the world.  Scotland was well represented at the battle of Khartoum
by two of our Highland regiments.  (Here a voice shouted out,
"Scotland Yet!")  Yes, Scotland yet, and Scotland for ever, will be
the cry; and I can speak for those two battalions that they in no way
went behind from what other regiments had done in other fields of our
great empire; and you may be sure of this, that our Scottish
regiments will always be able to show that high and distinguished
valour and discipline for which they have so long been noted....  It
would almost seem by the splendid reception you have given me here,
and which I have had in another part of Scotland, that you thought I
had played a very great part in the campaign.  I feel bound, as an
honest man, to disabuse you of such a misapprehension.  The campaign
was carried out by a very great man, the Sirdar, Lord Kitchener, who
is a man of great ability, and who in the future undoubtedly will
shine as one of our great soldiers.  The campaign was a marvel of
organisation.  It was marvellous how that railway was made across the
desert.  Great credit was due to the Sirdar, but I should like also
to bring before you another name--that of the general of our
division--General Gatacre, whose constant care and great power of
leading men aided the successful issue of events.  There is still
another man I should like to mention.  He is a Scotsman, General
Macdonald, who led one of the {160} Egyptian brigades.  He got his
chance, and he was able to take it, and certainly by his tactics, by
his coolness, by his perception at the proper moment, he had a great
deal to do with the success of the day; and it was a great
satisfaction to myself to be able with the brigade under my command
to go and support him on a somewhat critical occasion.'

He concluded his address by a humorous reference which pleased an
audience of miners: to the effect that in the near future he hoped
the line to Khartoum would be supplied with coal from the Niddrie
pits!  As the cavalcade proceeded, presentations of bouquets of
flowers, wreaths of laurel, and other kindly greetings marked the
General's way.  At the entrance-hall of Niddrie Marischal, Mr. Thomas
Skirving of Niddrie Mains, on behalf of himself and the tenantry,
presented an address of welcome.  This was feelingly replied to by
the General in a few well-chosen words, concluding as follows:--'No
Roman emperor coming from a victorious campaign could have been half
so well received as I to-day have been, and as long as I live I can
never forget it.  If there is one thing that makes a man nerve
himself to accomplish a difficult task, it is the thought that he is
thought well of by the people in the midst of whom he lives.  I
cannot tell you all I feel--I should be more than human if I could.'

It may here be mentioned that General Wauchope brought home with him
one of the Khalifa's banners which had been given to him by General
Macdonald as a memento of his timely assistance at the battle of
Omdurman.  It is of white damur cotton, with a line of Arabic in blue
across its face inscribed, 'Mohammed Ahmed el Mahdi Kalifat er
Rasul.'  On a gold band on the staff is the inscription, 'September
1898.  They were brave {161} foemen, these Dervishes.'  This and
other trophies now find a resting-place in Niddrie Marischal.

A time of busy activity in metropolitan and county affairs followed
General Wauchope's return home, and his high place as a public man
was now universally recognised.  His services were largely in request
specially in connection with public and social functions of various
kinds,--opening of bazaars of ladies' work, inspecting boys'
brigades, presiding at lectures and concerts, school board work,
county council work, and his duties as an elder of the Church of
Scotland--these all engrossed much of his attention and a large share
of his time during the winter and spring following his return from
the Soudan.

[Sidenote: At Windsor Castle]

Honours also were heaped upon him on all sides, but without in any
way marring his simplicity of character, or causing him to be any the
less the plain, free and easy approachable man he ever was, even to
the meanest hodman.  To high and low alike he was ever courteous and
considerate, and he most willingly lectured, or presided at lectures,
concerts, or meetings of friendly societies, wherever he thought he
could be useful.  For his distinguished services in the Soudan
campaign Wauchope was now promoted from Brigadier to the rank of
Major-General, and towards the end of November 1898 he received the
Queen's commands to attend at Windsor Castle, and had the privilege
on that occasion of dining with Her Majesty along with his brother
officer Sir William Gatacre--not the first time he had been similarly
honoured.

Of course every other engagement must give way to a summons of this
kind; and Major-General Wauchope's presence at a meeting in Dalkeith
on the evening of the same day had to be dispensed with, though much
to the disappointment of those who had come to hear him speak.

{162}

At bazaars he was always happy in his remarks, and whether the object
were the building of a new church, or a manse, or getting up funds
for a drill hall, he commended it with earnestness and wit, and at
the same time did not stint his own contribution to the cause.  On
one of these occasions he was appropriately introduced to the company
by Dr. Gray of Liberton 'as a sincere Christian, a true-hearted
gentleman, a brave soldier, and a modest man.'

In the work of the Boys' Brigade and Volunteer gatherings he was
delighted to give his support, and was frequently asked to take a
part in their meetings both at New Craighall and Portobello.

It was so characteristic of the outspoken candour of his nature, that
his inspections were not matters of formal display, or the mere
occasion of fulsome praise.  Drill to him was business; and he was
quick to detect faults, and if needful correct them.  Once at an
open-air inspection of the Portobello Company of the Boys' Brigade,
after a thorough examination of the lads, he addressed them upon the
various points of drill, and emphasised certain weaknesses noticed by
him; for, as he expressed it, 'he did not come there to tell them
they were the best creatures on earth, for he did not believe they
were.  Taking all things into consideration, he thought they did very
well, but they might do better.'  The spectators were somewhat amused
at the critical attitude of the General, but it was none the less
appreciated, for on this subject an ounce of criticism from him was
worth a ton of praise from any other person.

[Sidenote: Liberton School Board]

The same qualities of thoroughness and close application
characterised General Wauchope's conduct in the School Board and
Parish Council of Liberton, of both of which he was for some time a
member.  He was specially {163} interested in the education of the
young, and spent much time making himself acquainted with the
intricacies of the code and details of school management, and on a
recent occasion it is recalled how at the annual visit of the
Government Inspector, he followed close upon the Inspector's heels
during his visit, in order that he might fully comprehend the whole
system of public school education, and make himself familiar with its
requirements.

On one occasion, in the absence of the chairman, Major Gordon
Gilmour, he was called upon to preside at a meeting of the School
Board, but having ridden over from Niddrie House to Liberton
Church--in the vestry of which the meeting was held--in riding
costume, with top boots, spurs, riding-breeches, etc., he was
reluctant to pose as chairman.  Yielding to pressure, he, however, at
length consented, jocularly appealing to the reporters not to _take
off_ his coat, or mention his costume in their report!

In the routine of parochial work the General took his full share, and
never shirked discussions on even the smallest details of poor relief.

While he did not care to bulk largely in the public eye, and was
specially desirous that his private benefactions should be known as
little as possible, yet it was well understood that he was an
unobtrusive but most liberal benefactor to the district.  Dr. Andrew
Balfour of Portobello gives the following instance.  'I remember
well,' he says, 'that ere he went out to Egypt as captain in the
Black Watch, during the Arabi Pasha rebellion, he said to me, "Now,
Balfour, I will trust to you to let me know of anything going on at
Niddrie in which I can lend a helping hand."  It so happened at that
time we started reading and recreation rooms for the miners, so I
wrote to him, as he desired, with the result that he at once sent
{164} me a kind letter and an order for £25 to help the scheme.'

His private benefactions were as a rule administered with
praiseworthy discrimination, as the following incident will show.
Two little boys had been caught pilfering coal and were lodged in
jail.  On the circumstance being reported to the General, he visited
the little fellows in prison, and learning the circumstances of their
family, and that their mother was a poor, struggling, hard-working
widow, he at once sent her half a ton of coals, and the boys were
liberated.

On the 14th April 1899, General Wauchope had conferred on him the
honorary degree of Doctor of Laws by the University of Edinburgh.
The spring graduation ceremonial in which arts, science, and law
degrees are conferred, is generally of an interesting character, but
on this occasion it was more than usually imposing.  This was owing
in some measure to its being performed in the recently opened M'Ewan
Hall, an adjunct of the University, and the handsomest hall in the
city; but more especially from the fact that like honorary degrees
were to be conferred at the same time on Lord Wolseley, the Marquis
of Dufferin, and other distinguished men.

It was a magnificent spectacle, and the large audience which crowded
the spacious hall at an early hour in the forenoon cordially greeted
the General as he ascended the rostrum to receive the degree from his
father-in-law, Sir William Muir, who as vice-chancellor presided on
the occasion.

In formally presenting him to the Senatus, Professor Sir Ludovic
Grant took occasion to say: 'It is a fortunate coincidence that a
graduation ceremonial which is honoured with the presence of the
Commander-in-Chief, should also {165} include among its distinguished
guests one who is so noble an embodiment of all that is best and
bravest in the British Army, as is to be found in General Wauchope.
Here in Scotland his name is a household word, synonymous with high
courage and devotion to duty.  It were superfluous to recall the
occasions on which their gallant commander has led the Black Watch to
victory, or to rehearse the long tale of all his exploits and all but
mortal wounds.  But it is not in his capacity as a soldier only that
he does with his might that which his right hand finds to do.  There
is not a miner in the village of Niddrie who will not testify to the
watchful guardianship which he exercises over his people.  He has
thrown himself with characteristic zest into public affairs, and we
all know that the battle of the warrior is not the only form of
contest in which he has shown himself a dauntless foeman.  The
University rejoices to inscribe the name of so gallant and
public-spirited a soldier on her roll of honorary graduates in law.'

That General Wauchope had not only won his spurs but his doctor's
hood in fair fight goes without saying.  His military services could
not refuse him the former; and it says much for the discrimination of
the great Scottish University that it should have discerned in one
whose scholastic education was of the smallest, and who certainly had
not the benefit of a university training, a fitting subject for so
great an honour as it conferred.  But the Senatus recognised this
fact, that his life all through had been an educational training,
equal at least to all the learning of the schools.  A life of hard
experience well utilised has often achieved great results, as in
Wauchope's case it did.

But honours of this kind did not turn his head, or cause {166} him to
forget the commoner duties of life, or lessen his interest in others.
He could and did sympathise with distress and trouble, and even the
brute creation were not forgotten by him, as the following instance
will show.  Lord Wolseley arrived in Edinburgh the day preceding the
graduation ceremony, and was the guest of General Wauchope at
Niddrie.  One evening the two officers were taking a walk together
round the grounds.  As they passed the cottage door of one of his
tenants, the man's daughter was noticed to be leading a horse which
was labouring under a severe attack of inflammation.  Wauchope at
once stopped and inquired of the girl what was the matter, and on
being informed, the two commanders were soon as much engrossed in the
discussion of the poor animal's malady, and the best remedy for it,
as if it had been a question of important military strategy.

One other event in civil life gave General Wauchope in the summer of
this year considerable notoriety.  On the sudden death in June of Mr.
Robert Cox, the member for South Edinburgh, he was, at the urgent
request of the Unionist party, induced once more to enter the lists
as a candidate for parliamentary honours against Mr. Arthur Dewar,
advocate, who represented the Liberal party.

The contest was a short one, but while it lasted it was sharp, for
both the candidates and their supporters threw themselves into it
with vigour and earnestness.

As in his famous campaign against Mr. Gladstone, the chief feature of
the General's policy was the integrity of the Empire, as opposed to
the cry of Home Rule for Ireland, and although other subjects formed
a part of his programme, still that was for him the root question of
all others at the time.

At a largely attended meeting of his supporters, held {167} on the
9th June, Mr. John Harrison, the chairman, in formally nominating him
for the vacancy, spoke of the name of Wauchope 'as one which stirred
the blood of every one who had any pride in his country.  He was
known wherever the English language was spoken.  Wherever the British
went he was known as a gallant soldier, who had done his duty to his
country in many climes and in many circumstances, as a soldier of the
Crown.  He was known in a narrower sphere all over Scotland as an
honourable politician, who fought some years ago a good fight in
Midlothian.  He fought an uphill fight--what some considered an
impossible fight--and in losing it he scored a tremendous success.
But he was also known as a good neighbour, whose ancestors had
resided at Niddrie for centuries back.'

General Wauchope's speeches at this and various other meetings, held
almost daily for the following two weeks, were of a most stirring
nature, but were always characterised by courtesy towards opponents,
and the utmost frankness in stating his opinions.  He scorned to
'hedge' a question to secure votes, and when challenged with being a
Tory, and therefore ineligible for a Liberal constituency, he boldly
took up the challenge.  'Mr. Dewar had said he was a Tory.  (A voice,
"Quite right.")  Quite right.  Yes.  Mr. Dewar was quite right.  He
never said he was wrong.  He often wondered why there should be any
disgrace in being called a Tory.  Who had done most for the working
classes in days gone by?  Who passed the Factory Acts?  Did Mr.
Gladstone or Mr. Bright pass the Factory Acts?  No; it was the Tory
party--that party which had been so much abused.'  At another time,
referring to free speech, he said: 'He knew there were many in the
hall opposed to him in politics.  There was no use putting the
blinkers on that {168} fact; but he did not see why, though thus
opposed, they should not meet together as free citizens of a free
city, and have it out thoroughly.  He never liked to use the word
opponent.  He always said "political" opponent, because he found that
some of the best friends he had were politically opposed to him.  He
was pleased to think that in this country more and more both sides
were coming together to discuss political affairs in a quiet and
proper manner.  It was not always so.  When he was young, things were
much hotter then.  There was more powder in the air.'

In reference to our foreign policy, the General spoke in the highest
terms of Lord Salisbury's dealing with the Soudan question, as
compared with that of Mr. Gladstone's Government, when divisions in
the Liberal party had led to so much loss of life and money without
corresponding results.  And in regard to the Transvaal question, then
beginning once more to attract public attention, he insisted strongly
that his great anxiety was that peace should be preserved.  There was
no man, he said, who was a greater lover of peace than he was, but he
deprecated the vacillation and weakness and change of policy of 1881
that caused all the trouble then, and from which all the present
trouble had arisen.  What he wanted to see now was a strong and firm
line taken, and he believed matters there would be put right.  It
could not be to the advantage of the Transvaal that British subjects
should be treated as they were being treated now.  What he wanted was
that their people should be treated as human beings, and have the
same voice in the government of the country as was given them in any
other civilised country.'  He admitted that the Jameson Raid was a
most unwise and wicked proceeding, and had done a great deal to
damage their {169} relationship with the Transvaal, the Orange Free
State, and the Dutch portion of South Africa; 'but although that was
true, it did not remove the fact that the position of their
countrymen in the Transvaal had not been improved.  The great mass of
them had nothing to do with the Jameson Raid.  They were British
subjects, who went out there under the _ægis_ of the British Crown,
and surely it was their bounden duty as a nation to see that their
rights were respected.'

The poll was taken on 19th June, with the result that Mr. Dewar, the
Liberal candidate, was returned with a majority of 831 over 4989
votes given for General Wauchope.  The General in a manly speech at
the close assured his supporters 'they had no cause to be
discouraged, for they had only to gird up their loins, and victory
would one day rest with them.  He felt no bitterness whatever in
regard to this fight.  He was honoured by their call, and they had
told him he had not dishonoured them.  They had fought a square fight
on both sides, and if he was right in his estimate of the citizens of
South Edinburgh, they would very soon put matters right.  It was only
the difference of 400 men going from the one side to the other, and
he would, so far as in him lay, do his very utmost at any time to
stand by and aid them.'

It is due to Mr. Dewar to say that he looked upon the General as 'a
foeman worthy of his steel.'  In returning thanks to his supporters,
he frankly acknowledged that 'we have won a victory against the
strongest and most gallant opponent that could have been put in the
field, and I rejoice to say that the contest has been carried on with
the utmost courtesy and good feeling on both sides.'  These words,
spoken, as it were, in the very heat of the {170} controversy, were
more than confirmed some six months after, when the sad news of the
General's death on the battlefield reached Edinburgh.

The annual meeting of the South Edinburgh Liberals--which was
intended to be of a social as well as business character--was held on
the evening of the 13th December, the very day on which the news
came; but instead of going on with the programme of proceedings, it
was resolved out of respect for the General's memory only to go
through with the ordinary formal business and then adjourn, Mr. Dewar
remarking, 'that having regard to the sad intelligence just received,
it would be utterly out of place that anything in the nature of a
social evening should be held....  When he stood before them in that
hall a few months ago, he had told them he counted it an honour to be
opposed by a soldier so distinguished, and a man so eminent and
thoroughly respected as General Wauchope.  As the election proceeded,
their regard for him increased day by day, and now that he was dead
he felt as if they were in the very presence of death; ... and every
one would agree that the proper and respectful course to take was to
give their last tribute to a man who was a gallant opponent of
theirs, and who became their friend; and they should place upon his
grave a wreath of respect and regard.'  The chairman, in seconding
the proposal, said 'he had frequently come in contact with General
Wauchope at the election, and it was remarkable that during the whole
contest, however keen it was, their opponent never uttered one single
word he had cause to regret.  No election,' he added, 'was ever
fought with more good feeling than the contest between Mr. Dewar and
General Wauchope.'  And as showing the entire accord of the large
meeting with what had been said, the audience in {171} silence, and
upstanding, signified their sympathy with the resolution, and quietly
dispersed.

General Wauchope's political contests were thus characteristic of the
man.  There was the set purpose, the indomitable will; no shrinking
from declaring what he thought was the truth, but an ever dauntless
standing up for the right at any hazard, all combined with a modest
diffidence of his own personal merits, and the utmost respect and
courtesy for his opponents' opinions.  It has been said, 'he makes no
friend who never made a foe'; but the General had a happy way of
turning his political foes into fast friends.

With him political opinion did not sever the ties of friendship.
Personalities did not enter into his political life.  He would hold
his own tenaciously, and give blow for blow in fair fight, but there
it ended.  Meeting a number of friends at the Church Offices, 22
Queen Street, shortly after this election, who were sympathising with
him on his defeat, he cheerily replied, 'Oh, I don't think much of a
man if he can't take a beating.'




{172}

CHAPTER X

OUTBREAK OF HOSTILITIES IN SOUTH AFRICA--COMMAND OF THE HIGHLAND
BRIGADE--DEPARTURE FOR SOUTH AFRICA--THE SITUATION--BATTLE OF
MAGERSFONTEIN--DEATH--FUNERAL--AFTER THE BATTLE.


Another and a more stirring field of action was in store for General
Wauchope.  In several of his election speeches reference, as we have
shown, was made to the question then beginning to agitate the public
mind, as to our relationship with the Transvaal Republic.  It was not
thought, however, that the difficulty was of such a nature as could
not easily be overcome by diplomatic arrangement.  True, the
correspondence between Mr. Chamberlain, the Colonial Secretary, and
the Transvaal Government had been protracted, and had practically
failed in securing any concession in favour of foreign residents in
the Transvaal; but few realised how near we were to the verge of a
war which has proved one of the greatest and most calamitous of the
century.

[Sidenote: South Africa]

It will be in the recollection of our readers that when in 1881 the
Boers invaded Natal and gained the victories of Laing's Nek and
Majuba Hill, Sir Evelyn Wood had ranged his forces for an extended
attack upon them and was ready for action; and notwithstanding that
Sir Frederick, now Lord Roberts, had reached South Africa with 10,000
{173} additional men, the Government of Mr. Gladstone abandoned their
position and hurriedly patched up a peace with Mr. Kruger.  All
accounts agree that the treaty or 'surrender' after Majuba was
regarded by both whites and blacks all over South Africa as an
absolute capitulation.  It had at all events a most disastrous effect
upon British influence there.  From that date arose in the Boer mind
that most fatal ingredient of racial animosity, contempt.  As Kruger
afterwards said, 'he had once reckoned with the British army,' and he
felt he could safely do so again.  The one idea apparently fixed in
his mind and growing every day was to get rid of his subordination to
the Queen, with a view, as the Transvaal grew in military efficiency,
to subvert her power in South Africa altogether, and set up a Dutch
Republic.

Owing partly to the poverty of the country until the great influx of
British and foreign colonists, generally called 'Uitlanders,' and the
development of the gold and diamond mines after 1884-5, the politics
of the Transvaal created little or no attention in England till about
1895, when Boer raids into Bechuanaland and elsewhere obliged the
British authorities on the spot to protect our Colonial interests
against their further advances.  But then came the Jameson Raid at
the very end of that year, which, though universally condemned both
by the British Government and people as an infraction of
international law, was yet the outcome of deep-rooted discontent in
the Transvaal by the English and other settlers there.  The 'Raid'
was the turning-point in recent Transvaal history.  In the first
place, it attracted the attention of the whole civilised world, and
placed the Transvaal, the Uitlanders, and the relationship of Great
Britain both to the one and to the other in the full glare of day.
From {174} the date of the raid the difficulties of the position were
more and more accentuated, and the designs of President Kruger for
entire independence were hastened to a consummation.  By the Boer
government the course of justice was perverted, and the Chief-Justice
was made subordinate to the will of the Executive.  Owing to
insecurity to life and property, mine owners could scarcely get a
supply of labourers.  Kruger and his Hollanders ran the country for
their own benefit.  They taxed and plundered the Uitlanders, while
neglecting such matters as roads, bridges, railways, sanitary and
educational schemes, but took care to arm the Boers while they
fattened on monopolies, and kept the Uitlanders from any share in the
government.  In short, the Transvaal was a Republic in nothing but
the name.  It was really a corrupt oligarchy, in which a privileged
minority made laws to suit themselves, and put the whole burden of
taxation on the shoulders of a majority who were deprived of the
franchise.

[Sidenote: Uitlander grievances]

With a largely increased revenue, President Kruger found he could now
indulge his hostility to this country and his long-cherished hopes of
independence by providing for a possible struggle.  As Lord Selborne
said, 'the money was used to turn the whole of the Boer population
into soldiers; it was used to stock the whole country with millions
of cartridges, to buy battery after battery of guns, to buy rifles
enough to arm every Boer four or five times over, to build things
previously unknown in South Africa, namely, great fortresses in the
middle of the country, at Pretoria and at Johannesburg--such
fortresses as were not to be seen in England except to guard the
public dockyards, and such as could only be seen on the frontier
between France and Germany.'  The course of the war has abundantly
shown that these enormous preparations {175} had been made in view of
other than mere native aggression; that, in fact, nothing less than
the entire subversion of British authority over our South African
Colonies was to be aimed at.

So intolerable had the oligarchy at Pretoria made the position of the
Uitlanders, that these at length petitioned the Queen for some
redress of their grievances.  This document, signed by 40,000
persons, 21,000 of whom were British subjects in the Transvaal, was
handed to the British Agent in Pretoria for transmission to the High
Commissioner, and was forwarded by Mr. Conyngham Greene in the
ordinary official course to the Government.

The petition showed that for many years discontent had existed among
the Uitlanders, who are mostly British subjects.  The Uitlanders
possessed most of the wealth and intelligence in the country, and
they had no voice in its government.  In spite of the promises of the
Transvaal Government and the petitions addressed to the President,
there had been no practical reforms.  The discontent culminated in
the insurrection of 1895.  The people then placed themselves in the
hands of the High Commissioner, and President Kruger promised
reforms.  Since then their position had been worse.  Legislation had
been unfriendly.  The petition cited as examples the Aliens'
Immigration Act, withdrawn at the instance of the British Government;
the Press Law, giving the President arbitrary powers; the Aliens'
Expulsion Law, permitting the expulsion of British subjects at the
will of the President without appeal to the High Court, while
burghers cannot be expelled, this being contrary to the Convention.
The municipality granted to Johannesburg was worthless.  It was
entirely subject to the Government.  Half of the councillors are
necessarily burghers, though the {176} burghers and Uitlanders number
1000 and 23,000 respectively.  The Government rejected the report of
the Industrial Commission, which was composed of its own officials.
The High Court had been reduced to a condition of subservience, the
revenues of the country had been diverted for the purpose of building
forts at Pretoria and Johannesburg in order to terrorise British
subjects; the police were exclusively burghers, ignorant and
prejudiced, and were a danger to the community; jurors were
necessarily burghers, and justice was impossible in cases where a
racial issue might be involved.

[Sidenote: Petition of the Uitlanders]

The petition went on to state that indignation was finally aroused by
the murder of Edgar and the favouritism displayed by the Public
Prosecutor.  A petition to the Queen, presented by 4000 British
subjects, was rejected in consequence of informalities.  For taking a
leading part in getting up the petition, Messrs. Dodd and Webb were
arrested under the Public Meetings Act, and were only released on
giving bail of £1000, five times the amount required for the murderer
of Edgar.  A meeting within a closed place, permitted by law and
sanctioned expressly by the Government, was called by the South
African League on January 14.  This was broken up by an armed and
organised band of burghers and police in plain clothes led by
Government officials.  The police refused to interfere.  The
behaviour of the British subjects was orderly.  They did not
retaliate, preferring to lay their grievances before Her Majesty.  No
arrests were made either of the officials responsible or of the
rioters.

The condition of the British subjects, the petition concluded, was
intolerable.  They were prevented by the direct action of the
Government from ventilating their grievances; 'wherefore the
petitioners pray Her Majesty {177} to extend her protection to them,
to cause an inquiry to be held into their grievances, to secure the
reform of abuses, and to obtain substantial guarantees from the
Transvaal Government and a recognition of the petitioners' rights.'
This important petition was accompanied by affidavits substantiating
the various allegations made in it.

To have refused a petition like this under the circumstances which
had arisen, would have been tantamount to resigning the position of
paramount power.  Negotiations and conferences ensued, in the vain
hope of adjusting racial differences, under Boer domination.  They
came to nothing, and only proved that the Pretoria Government were
merely waiting their time to strike a blow which they hoped would for
ever terminate British authority in South Africa.  The opportunity,
they thought, had at length come, and on Monday the 9th October an
ultimatum of the most insolent nature was presented to the British
Government, demanding not only the immediate withdrawal of our troops
on the borders of the Republic, but that all reinforcements which had
arrived since 1st June should be removed from South Africa.  Not only
so, but that any of Her Majesty's troops now on the high seas should
not be landed in any part of our colonies!  To these requirements an
immediate answer in the affirmative was demanded 'not later than 5
o'clock on Wednesday'!  No more ridiculous message has been received
by the British Government for over one hundred years.  Her Majesty's
Government declined to discuss the conditions of the ultimatum, but
expressed regret that the Transvaal Government should contemplate so
extreme and so serious a step as war.  The invasion of Natal by the
Boers followed at once, and the Orange Free State, though in no way
involved in the matter in dispute, gratuitously sided with the {178}
Pretoria Government, and an invasion of Cape Colony was made later on
chiefly by the Free Staters.  With great boldness and, it must be
said, with much military skill, the Boer forces seized the passes,
attacked the small garrisons on the frontiers, and after several
successes and defeats they finally settled down to besiege Ladysmith
in Natal, and Kimberley and Mafeking in Cape Colony--sieges which
will be long memorable in the history of British South Africa.

The war had only proceeded for about a week when General Wauchope
received a commission to command the Third or Highland Brigade,
forming part of the western column under General Lord Methuen for the
relief of Kimberley and Mafeking.  This position was undoubtedly the
highest honour he had achieved, and its acquisition afforded him the
utmost satisfaction.  He was residing at Niddrie at the time, and as
soon as it became known that he was ordered to the front, there was a
general desire among the miners and villagers that he should have a
suitable 'send-off,' and some arrangements had actually been made for
the occasion.  But time was short, and besides, the General, always a
modest man, shrank from publicity where he would be the central
figure, and he would not consent to it.

[Sidenote: Embarkation for the Cape]

This, however, did not prevent him saying farewell to his old
friends.  Amid all the bustle of preparation he found time to call at
the cottages of not a few in the grounds and in the village, to shake
hands with their inmates before he left; not, it is said, without
forebodings that it was for the last time.  To a friend in Edinburgh
who, in saying 'good-bye,' expressed the hope that he would soon be
back again with fresh laurels, he replied with a shake of the head,
'I don't half like the job we {179} have got; we have a very hard nut
to crack with these Boers.'  On Sunday, the 8th October, the General
and Mrs. Wauchope attended as usual the service in New Craighall
Parish Church.  It forms a part of the parish of Liberton, and the
church was erected chiefly for the large mining portion of the
population at the east end of the parish, in which the General took
so much interest.  He liked the simple, natural, artless form of the
Presbyterian service, and as his minister has since remarked, 'We
know how reverently and heartily he worshipped, and the pleasure he
had in hearing and in joining in the singing of the old psalms and
paraphrases, without any accompaniment.'  It was his last quiet
Sabbath in Scotland.  With a view to avoid fuss he slipped away that
evening by rail for London, without some of his nearest friends
knowing he was off, to see to the embarkation of his brigade.

The Highland Brigade was made up of the Seaforth Highlanders, the
Second Battalion Royal Highlanders (or Black Watch), and the Gordon
Highlanders--three crack Scotch regiments, which any man might have
been proud to command.  The two first embarked for South Africa at
Tilbury Fort on the 21st and 22nd October in the transports
_Mongolian_ and _Orient_ respectively, the total equipment in the
latter being about 1200 officers and men, including staff of a
cavalry brigade, medical corps, etc.  These were followed a fortnight
later by the Gordons under Colonel Downman from Edinburgh, among the
citizens of which city officers and men had earned an honoured name.

General Wauchope joined the transport _Aurania_ at Southampton on
23rd October, and some of his letters written on the eve of
embarkation are touching illustrations of kindly interest in others,
and specially in those {180} dependent on him.  To his old friend and
colonel in the first Soudan Expedition, Colonel Bayly, he writes:--


'MY DEAR OLD COLONEL,--Many thanks for your kind and affectionate
letter.  I wish you were going out in charge of the brigade.  I shall
sadly miss your wise counsels.  Well, I will do my best; and this I
know, whether I succeed or fail, you will stick up for me.--Yours
ever, A. G. WAUCHOPE.'


To Mr. Martin, the manager of the Niddrie Collieries, he wrote as
follows:--


'SOUTHAMPTON, 23_rd October_ 1899.

'I am just about to embark.  Please go and see Mrs. Wauchope when she
gets back.  She will act for me at all times in my spirit.  I hope
you understand about the send-off.  I hate fuss.  Give my love to all
my numerous friends in the works.  I hope "Klondyke" [one of the new
workings] will prosper and flourish.  I hope the war will soon be
over.  Symons is a terrible loss.  He was one of our best.  [General
Symons fell at the battle of Glencoe in Natal, 20th October.]  The
British officer and soldier is showing to the world that they are not
behind their fathers in the days of the Peninsula and Waterloo.  I
hope all may continue so to do, and then make it up with the Boers,
who really must be reasonable.  We have no grudge against them,
beyond that we cannot allow a Dutchman to be worth three
Scotsmen.--Ever yours, A. G. WAUCHOPE.'


To his head gardener, Mr. Alexander, also dated from Southampton on
23rd October, he writes:--'Dear Alexander, we are just off....
Please convey to all our men and women my thanks for their faithful
service to me, and {181} that I will hope to see them soon
again.--Yours very truly, A. G. WAUCHOPE.'


That amid all the bustle of preparing to embark he should still have
time for loving thoughts of Niddrie and 'the old folks at home,' and
should at the last moment take the trouble to write such kindly
words, speaks eloquently of the affection in his breast for all that
he had left behind in Scotland.

[Sidenote: Enthusiastic reception]

The _Aurania_ took out with her the 1st Battalion of Highland Light
Infantry, and Wauchope was accompanied by Captain Rennie of the Black
Watch, as his _aide-de-camp_.  The Black Watch in another vessel
reached Table Bay two or three days after the General's arrival, and
were at once entrained for De-Aar by half-battalions, so that until
he joined them a week or two afterwards, the General had had no
opportunity of coming in touch with his old regiment since his
appointment to the division.  Major Duff, who was with the Black
Watch at De-Aar, speaks of their meeting as a remarkable one.  'I
went up,' he says, 'in command of the leading half-battalion, and
when the men first saw the General, their reception of him was a most
truly enthusiastic one.  They cheered him over and over again, and it
reminded one of their send-off to him at York, as they had not seen
him since then.'

While the British Government were thus hurrying forward troops to the
seat of war with all despatch, weeks of course elapsed before they
could be in a position to meet the invaders.

The Boers in strong force, and evidently well prepared, had actively
assumed the aggressive, and in consequence of the unexpected
declaration of war by Presidents Kruger and Steyn, the northern part
of Cape Colony bordering {182} upon the Orange Free State was for a
time practically defenceless.  Taking advantage of this fact, the
Boers had advanced boldly across the frontier, attacking many of our
towns and villages, and formally annexing them to the Free State.
The arrival of British troops at the Cape in November to some extent
arrested this invasion, and as troops were poured into the Colony in
quick succession, Generals French, Gatacre, and Methuen found
themselves ultimately in a position to assume the offensive, their
communications and supplies being kept up by the three lines of
railway from Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, and East London respectively.
The Highland Brigade, originally destined for Natal, was stopped at
Cape Town and at once sent on to reinforce Lord Methuen in command of
the western division.  With his advanced base at De-Aar, at the
junction of the Port Elizabeth and Cape Town railways, and striking
north with what troops he had, Methuen engaged and defeated a party
of Boers near Belmont on the 10th November.  Nine days after, he had
concentrated his troops on the Orange River, driving the enemy before
him, and on the 23rd November he attacked and completely routed the
enemy in the decisive battle of Belmont.

After several skirmishes the battle of Modder River was fought, in
which the British encountered a Boer force of 11,000 men.  It lasted
the whole of Tuesday the 28th November, and was keenly contested; but
in spite of the bravery and superior position of the enemy, they were
compelled to withdraw, and Methuen formed his advanced camp on the
north side of the river.  After the Modder River fight he rested his
force until the 10th December, waiting for the battalions of
Wauchope's Highland Brigade, for the great naval gun, and the
howitzer battery, and for the {183} sorely needed cavalry.  The
valiant Ninth Brigade, composed of Yorkshire Light Infantry, 5th
Northumberlands, Loyal North Lancashires, Northamptonshires, 9th
Lancers, and Mounted Infantry, which had done such gallant work in
the previous battles, was now to be scattered, and in some measure
supplanted by the Argylls, Seaforths, Gordons, Black Watch, and
Highland Light Infantry of the fresher brigade.

Having secured his position on the Modder River, Lord Methuen found
the way to Kimberley still barred by the Boer army under General
Cronje.  The enemy were strongly intrenched among the rocks and
precipices of the hilly region, some four miles from the river,
between the railway on the west and the highroad to Kimberley on the
east, and commanded the position with their artillery.

[Sidenote: The Diamond City]

Lord Methuen resolved upon making a frontal attack in full force on
this stronghold, so as to drive the Boers out and clear the road to
the Diamond City, now suffering acutely the miseries of a siege.

Before making the attack, he resolved to shell the Boer position with
all his artillery and the great naval gun which had been dragged up
to a ridge overlooking the kopje occupied by the enemy, at ranges
varying between six thousand and eight thousand yards.  The
bombardment while it lasted was a severe one.  An eye-witness of the
scene says: 'The shells tore through the air with precisely the noise
of an express train rushing at highest speed, and when they burst
they seemed to envelop an acre of ground in heavy brown smoke, which
lifted and floated over the kopje as if it were a mass of pulverised
earth.  The noise of each discharge was like the bark of a monster
bulldog, and the bursting of each shell sounded like the cough of a
giant.'  It is believed that the lyddite {184} shells fell among the
Boers several times during the afternoon, but it is doubtful if the
damage done was sufficient to cause them to shift their position.
The naval gun remained on the ridge all night, and defined the
extreme left of the next day's battle-ground.  This ground extended
from the railway where the gun stood, across the veldt to the river
and along its northern bank for two miles, or about four miles from
the railway to near the Kimberley road.  It was covered--ridges and
level veldt alike--with bushes, or shapely little trees from four to
seven feet high, of round, full form, and pretty dense foliage.  In
such a veldt as this the Boers had two miles of trenches in front of
their strongly fortified heights, well packed with riflemen.  And not
only so; but to make the approach more difficult, lines of
barbed-wire fencing were run across the veldt parallel with the
trenches.

To attack such a strong position required the very best troops of the
British army, if the assault were to be a success, and Wauchope's
Highland Brigade was selected for the work.  Lord Methuen conceived
it to be his duty to take it at all hazards, seeing that his orders
were to relieve Kimberley, and the longer he remained inactive on the
Modder River, the probability was the enemy would become stronger in
front.  As soon therefore as the last of his reinforcements arrived
from De-Aar, he resolved to attack the Magersfontein kopje.  For this
purpose, as we have said, the heights were bombarded from 4.50 P.M.
to 6.40 P.M. on the 10th December, in the expectation that--judging
from the moral effect produced by his guns in the three previous
actions, and the anticipated effect of lyddite, to be used for the
first time--there would not only be great destruction of life in the
trenches, but a considerable demoralising effect on the enemy's
nerves.  {185} Whether this was so is doubtful.  A longer
bombardment, as the result proved, would in all probability have led
to a more successful issue of the enterprise, and with less loss to
our arms.

[Sidenote: On the eve of battle]

General Wauchope having received his orders, all were in readiness
for the attack, which it was resolved should be made in the darkness
of the early morning.

Fireside romancers have pictured Wauchope on the evening before the
battle as full of despondency and prepossessed with a sense of
imminent disaster.  Needless to say, these are purely imaginary
fancies.  He was not the man either to shirk danger or dread a deadly
engagement.

What afterwards happened is best described in the words of Lord
Methuen's despatch.  'The night march,' he says, 'was ordered for
12.30 A.M., the bearings and distance having been ascertained at
great personal risk by Major Benson, Royal Artillery, my Deputy
Assistant Adjutant-General.  The distance is two and a half miles,
and daybreak was due at 3.25 A.M.  About half an hour after the
Highland Brigade marched off it came on to pour, a heavy thunderstorm
accompanying the rain.  The downpour lasted until daybreak.  The
brigade was led with perfect accuracy to the point of assault by
Major Benson.  The advance was slow, even for a night march.  Major
Benson, with a compass in each hand, having frequently to halt on
account of the lightning and rifles affecting the compasses.  I may
remark that two rifles went off by accident before the march
commenced, and it is pretty clear that flashes from a lantern gave
the enemy timely notice of the march.

'Before moving off, Major-General Wauchope explained all he intended
to do, and the particular part each battalion of his brigade was to
play in the scheme.  The brigade {186} was to march in mass of
quarter columns, the four battalions keeping touch and, if necessary,
ropes were to be used for the left guides; these ropes were taken,
but I believe used by only two battalions.  What happened was as
follows:--Not finding any signs of the enemy on the right flank just
before daybreak, which took place at 4 A.M., as the brigade was
approaching the foot of the kopje, Major-General Wauchope gave the
order for the Black Watch to extend, but to direct its advance on the
spur in front, the Seaforth Highlanders to prolong to the left, the
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders to prolong to the right, the
Highland Light Infantry in reserve.  Five minutes earlier (the kopje
looming in the distance) Major Benson had asked Major-General
Wauchope if he did not consider it to be time to deploy.
Lieut.-Colonel Hughes-Hallett states that the extension could have
taken place two hundred yards sooner, but the leading battalion got
thrown into confusion in the dark by a very thick bit of bush about
twenty or thirty yards long.  The Seaforth Highlanders went round
this bush to the right, and had just got into its original position
behind the Black Watch when the order to extend was given by
Major-General Wauchope to the Black Watch.  The Seaforth Highlanders
and two companies of the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders were also
moving out, and were in the act of extending, when suddenly a heavy
fire was poured in by the enemy, most of the bullets going over the
men.

[Sidenote: Magersfontein]

'Lieut.-Colonel Hughes-Hallett at once ordered the Seaforths to fix
bayonets and charge the position.  The officers commanding the other
battalions acted in a similar manner.  At this moment some one gave
the word "Retire."  Part of the Black Watch then rushed back through
the ranks of the Seaforths.  Lieut.-Colonel Hallett {187} ordered his
men to halt and lie down, and not to retire.  It was now becoming
quite light, and some of the Black Watch were a little in front, to
the left of the Seaforths.  The artillery, advancing to the support
of the attack, had opened fire from the time it was light enough to
see.  No orders having been received by the Seaforths, the commanding
officer advanced the leading units to try and reach the trenches,
which were about four hundred yards off; but the officers and half
the men fell before a very heavy fire, which opened as soon as the
men moved.  About ten minutes later the Seaforths tried another rush,
with the same result.  Colonel Hughes-Hallett then considered it best
to remain where he was till orders came.

'Meanwhile the 9th Lancers, the 12th Lancers, G Battery Royal Horse
Artillery, and Mounted Infantry were working on the right flank.  At
twelve midnight on the 10th the 12th Lancers and Guards marched from
camp, the former to join the Cavalry Brigade, the latter to protect
the rear and right of the Highland Brigade.  Considering the night,
it does Major-General Sir Henry Colville immense credit that he
carried out his orders to the letter, as did Major-General Babington.
A heavy fire was maintained the whole morning.  The Guards Brigade
held a front of about one and three quarter miles.  The Yorkshire
Light Infantry protected my right flank with five companies, three
companies being left at a drift.  Captain Jones, Royal Engineers, and
Lieutenant Grubb were with the Balloon Section, and gave me valuable
information during the day.  I learnt from this source, at about
twelve noon, that the enemy were receiving large reinforcements from
Abutsdam and from Spytfontein.  The enemy held their own on this part
of the field, for the under-feature was strongly entrenched, {188}
concealed by small bushes, and on slight undulations.  At twelve noon
I ordered the battalion of Gordons, which was with the Supply Column,
to support the Highland Brigade.  The trenches, even after the
bombardment by lyddite and shrapnel since daybreak, were too strongly
held to be cleared.  The Gordons advanced in separate
half-battalions, and though the attack could not be carried home, the
battalion did splendid work throughout the day.

'At 1 P.M. the Seaforth Highlanders found themselves exposed to a
heavy crossfire, the enemy trying to get round to the right.  The
commanding officer brought his left forward.  An order to "Retire"
was given, and it was at this time that the greater part of the
casualties occurred.  The retirement continued for five hundred
yards, and the Highlanders remained there till dusk.  Lieut-Colonel
Downman, commanding the Gordons, gave the order to retire, because he
found his position untenable, so soon as the Seaforth Highlanders
made the turning movement to the right.  This was an unfortunate
retirement, for Lieut.-Colonel Hughes-Hallett had received
instructions from me to remain in position until dusk, and the enemy
were at this time quitting the trenches by tens and twenties.  I have
made use of Lieut.-Colonel Hughes-Hallett's report (the acting
Brigadier) for the description of the part the Highland Brigade took
in this action.

'Major-General Wauchope told me, when I asked him the question, on
the evening of the 10th, that he quite understood his orders, and
made no further remark.  He died at the head of the brigade, in which
his name will always remain honoured and respected.  His high
military reputation and attainments disarm all criticism.  Every
{189} soldier in my division deplores the loss of a fine soldier and
a true comrade.  The attack failed; the inclement weather was against
success; the men in the Highland Brigade were ready enough to rally,
but the paucity of officers and non-commissioned officers rendered
this no easy matter.  I attach no blame to this splendid brigade.
From noon until dark I held my own opposite to the enemy's
intrenchments.  G Battery Royal Horse Artillery fired hard till dark,
expending nearly two hundred rounds per gun.  Nothing could exceed
the conduct of the troops from the time of the failure of the attack
at daybreak.  There was not the slightest confusion, though the fight
was carried on under as hard conditions as one can imagine, for the
men had been on the move from midnight, and were suffering terribly
from thirst.  At 7.15 P.M. fighting ceased, the Highland Brigade
formed up under cover, the Guards Brigade held my front, the
Yorkshire Light Infantry secured my right flank, the cavalry and guns
were drawn in behind the cavalry.'

[Sidenote: An ill-fated enterprise]

Many descriptions have been published of the ill-fated enterprise,
differing in some respects from the despatch of the commander; and
much controversy has been raised as to an alleged difference of
opinion between Generals Methuen and Wauchope regarding the method of
the attack on the Boer position, and as to who was responsible for
its disastrous failure.  Into that controversy it is not our purpose
to enter, seeing so much of it is founded on mere conjecture,
coloured by the imagination or the prejudice of some of the writers.
Whether blunder, or miscalculation, or mere misadventure, no voice
has been ever raised to cast the shadow of blame on the officer who
gallantly led his brigade through that long dark night into what
proved an impossible position, a position {190} which the best troops
in the world could not have hoped to take.  Every precaution was made
that forethought could suggest.  Untoward circumstances, and not want
of courage, ruined all.

[Sidenote: Fall of the General]

That the fall of the General largely contributed to the loss of the
battle, seems all too plain.  He fell after being twice hit with
rifle bullets through his helmet, and even while lying on the ground,
when struck in the body, he appears, from the evidence of some of his
men who passed him as they still pressed on to his orders, to be able
to raise himself on his hands and knees, and taking a long farewell
of his comrades, he cried, 'Good-bye, men; fight for yourselves.  It
is man to man now.'  Other words are said to have been uttered, and
were freely circulated afterwards about the camp, and found their way
into letters written to friends at home; but in the din and confusion
of such a moment it is difficult to see how these--many of them
contradictory--can be accepted as his utterances.  One witness
describes the scene as 'an awful sight.  The bullets,' he says, 'were
like a shower of hail, and the shells were bursting all around us.
God knows how I got clear, for I was in the thick of it.  I felt the
heat of a shell on my face.  I never was so near being killed in my
life.  There were bullets hitting all around me, and whistling over
my head.  I have been in a few battles, but nothing like this....  We
would have beat them had our General not been killed.  He was shot in
three places.'

That General Wauchope fought and fell as a man and as a soldier,
carrying out his orders loyally to the end, has never been called in
question.  He died where he would have wished to die, at the head of
his gallant Highlanders, with his face to the foe.

{191}

All that fateful day the battle was carried on.  Our wounded and dead
lay as they fell, under a blazing sun, close to the Boer lines.  Over
their heads the shots of friends and foes passed, without ceasing.
'Many a gallant deed was done by comrades helping comrades; men who
were shot through the body lay without water, enduring all the agony
of thirst caused by their wounds and the blistering heat.  To them
crawled Scots with shattered limbs, sharing the last drop of water in
their bottles, and taking farewell messages to many a cottage home in
far-off Scotland.'  But still the battle raged.  Wounded and dead
must wait alike the ultimate fate of the day.  Lying on the veldt the
British still held their ground, firing when they could, but drawing
a hotter fire upon themselves from the trenches.  For fourteen hours
they thus lay--from three o'clock in the morning till six at night.
It was cruel work, with all the odds against the attackers, fighting
against a foe they could neither see nor reach.  Once the Guards made
a brilliant dash at the trenches, and like a torrent their resistless
valour bore down all before them, and for a brief few moments they
got within striking distance of the enemy; and well did they avenge
the slaughter of the Scots.  With bayonets fixed and a ringing cheer
the Guardsmen, we are told by a graphic writer, 'tossed the Boers out
of their trenches as men in English harvest-fields toss the hay.'
Then they retired under the deadly fire from the heights above,
falling thick as hail upon them.

Not till the evening did the conflict cease.  Then there was an
armistice, and our ambulance bearers went out to bring in their
fallen comrades.  The Rev. J. Robertson, chaplain of the brigade,
mentions in a letter: 'I was with Wauchope when he fell.  I think he
wished me to keep {192} near him, but I got knocked down, and in the
dark and wild confusion I was borne away, and did not see him in life
again, though I spared no effort to find him, in the hope that he
might be only wounded.'  This statement is confirmed by the Anglican
chaplain with Lord Methuen, who, after describing the battle of
Magersfontein, thus refers to the Highland Brigade: 'Being chiefly
Highlanders, they were in Robertson's charge.  He, good-hearted
fellow, was risking his life in the trenches and under fire to find
General Wauchope's body.  Why he was not killed in his fearless
efforts I cannot tell.'  The General's body was found next morning
from twenty to thirty yards off the Boer trenches, 'riddled with
bullets,' and was carried reverently back into camp, amidst the
unmistakable grief of every soldier.

[Sidenote: 'Lochaber no more']

The exigencies of war brook no delay, and so the funeral was arranged
for the day following.  Three hundred yards to the rear of the
township of Modder River, just as the sun was sinking in a blaze of
African splendour, on the evening of Tuesday the 13th December, a
long shallow grave lay exposed in the breast of the veldt.  To the
westward the broad river fringed with trees ran unconsciously along;
to the eastward the heights still held by the enemy scowled
menacingly; north and south stretched the long swelling plain.  A few
paces to the north of the grave, fifty dead Highlanders lay, dressed
as they had fallen.  They had followed their chief to the field, and
they were to follow him to the grave.  It was an impressive sight,
and as one who saw it has said: 'The plaids dear to every Highland
clan were represented there, and, as I looked, out of the distance
came the sound of the pipes.  It was the General coming to join his
men.  There, right under the eyes of the enemy, {193} moved with slow
and solemn tread all that remained of the Highland Brigade.  In front
of them walked the chaplain, with bared head, dressed in his robes of
office; then came the pipers with their pipes, sixteen in all,
wailing out "Lochaber no More"; and behind them, with arms reversed,
moved the Highlanders, in all the regalia of their regiments; and in
the midst, the dead General, borne by four of his comrades.'  Many a
cheek was wet with tears, and many a heart throbbed with emotion as
the last kind offices were performed.  Right up to the grave they
marched, then broke away into companies until the General was laid in
the shallow grave, with a Scottish square of armed men around him.
The simple Presbyterian service of the Scottish Church was led by Mr.
Robertson, the chaplain, amid profound silence.  No shots were fired.
Only the silent farewell salute of his sorrowing men as they marched
campwards in the gathering darkness, and the black pall of an African
night was drawn sadly over the scene.

[Illustration: THE GRAVE ON THE BATTLEFIELD.  _From a Photograph by
H. C. Shelley of "The King."_]

There, among his men, Wauchope's body might have been left to rest on
the open veldt, and the spot would doubtless ever afterwards have
been consecrated in the heart of every patriot Briton, lonely and
wild though it be.  But the kindly sympathy of a brother Scot found
for him a last resting-place four hundred miles farther south in Cape
Colony, at Matjesfontein.  On receipt of the news of Wauchope's
death, the Honourable J. D. Logan, a member of the Cape Legislative
Council, who owns an extensive estate there, on which there is a
small enclosed private burying-ground, promptly asked permission to
bring the body for reinterment there.  Permission having been granted
by General Lord Methuen, Mr. Logan proceeded to Modder River, and
returned with the {194} body in a zinc-lined coffin on the 18th
December.  The remains of the gallant General were buried next
morning with full military honours, in presence of a considerable
number of people.  Those present included Captain Rennie, _A.-D.-C._
to the General, Mr. Logan and his family, Major Stuart, and Colonel
Schrembrucker.  The escort consisted of eleven officers and 195
non-commissioned officers and men of various detachments, including
some of the Highland Brigade, and a fife band with pipers.  The
coffin was borne on a gun-carriage, which was covered with many
beautiful wreaths, one bearing the inscription, 'With the Logans'
deepest sympathy.  In memory of one of Scotland's brave ones.'  And
on another was inscribed, 'A token of admiration and respect for one
of Scotland's heroes, from his fellow-countrymen at Matjesfontein.'
The favourite charger of the General followed the coffin, and the
service, conducted by the Revs. Messrs. Robertson and Price, army
chaplains, was of a deeply impressive character.  Thus passed from
sight, at the age of fifty-four, the man whose career it has been our
privilege to sketch.

[Sidenote: After the battle]

Few episodes in the Transvaal war--and there have been many striking
ones--have made such an impression on the public at large, or on
those immediately concerned, as the fall of the leader of the
Highland Brigade on that disastrous 10th of December 1899.

The one man best qualified to speak of its effects upon the soldiers
at the front, has in touching letters referred to the sadness that
overspread the camp, and the deep religious feelings which were
awakened.  The Rev. J. Robertson says: 'Of the seven who formed our
original mess--General Wauchope's brigade staff--only Colonel Ewart
and myself remain.  He is an old campaigning {195} friend, so also is
General Macdonald, who has now joined us.  I am glad I knew the
Brigadier before.  It makes all the difference, messing and living
together.  I am not to refer to General Wauchope.  Mere acquaintances
mourn his loss, how much more one who was honoured with his
friendship and confidence?  As for the Highland Brigade--there is but
one heart, and it's sore, sore.  A strange fatality befell all my
best-known friends.  Whenever I let myself think of them, there's a
painful tug at my heart's strings.  God knows what lies before.  To
give some idea of how hearts have been touched, on the last Sunday of
the year I had communion.  I thought it better to take it then than
on the first Sunday, when the year would be a week old and the good
start perhaps lost.  I did not make intimation the Sunday before, as
I did not think I would be able to get communion wine in time.  I
just stated at the ordinary parade service that I purposed having it
after the benediction was pronounced.  I invited any and every one to
come forward, even though they had not partaken it before, saying
that in the circumstances I took it upon me to dispense with the
usual preparatory forms of procedure.  To my great surprise, but to
my heart's joy, knowing how backward young men are--Highlanders
especially--in coming to the Lord's Table, over 250 stepped out, and
many more would have come had it not been for the fact that they had
to go at once on picket duty.  In fact, they had strained a point to
attend parade service, coming all ready to go on outpost, heavily
accoutred.  With a full heart, I thanked God and took courage.'  In
another letter the chaplain says: 'We were a sad, a very sad brigade,
for though we tried to hide it, we took our losses to heart sorely;
for "men of steel are men who feel."  But out of evil came good.
{196} The depth of latent religious feeling that was evoked in
officers and men was a revelation to me, and were it not that
confessions, and acknowledgments, and vows are too sacred for
repetition, I could tell a tale that would gladden your hearts--not
that I put too much stress on what's said or done at such an
impressionable, solemnising time, but after-proof of sincerity has
not been wanting.'

The receipt of the news of the General's death in England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and indeed throughout the world, was accompanied with
every expression of grief.  It was felt that the empire had lost one
of its noblest and best, that a hero had gone down to his rest ere
his full life's work was done.  Alike from soldier and civilian, from
political opponent and political friend, came the common lament;
while the fluent pens of journalists were in some cases constrained
to acknowledge that it was all but impossible to write with calmness
of the sad event.

The national feeling was roused as it seldom has been before, and
from one correspondent we have the following remarkable testimony.
'I believe,' he says, 'that General Wauchope's tragic death did more
than anything else to bring the nation as a nation to call upon God.
No doubt before his death there was much prayer throughout the nation
both in private and in almost all the churches; but there was no
national acknowledgment of God--no day set apart by authority for
this purpose.  General Wauchope's death awoke the national
conscience, and there was a public recognition of God by the nation.
It is a matter of history that when this took place the tide of
battle, which for so long had been against us, then began to turn in
our favour.  Andrew Gilbert Wauchope did not die in vain.'

[Sidenote: Sympathy of the Queen]

Her Majesty the Queen felt the loss she and the country had
sustained, and, with her usual womanly {197} consideration, sent a
message through her Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Hopetoun, desiring
him to express her deep sympathy with Mrs. Wauchope of Niddrie, and
with Lady Ventry, the General's sister.  In this message, it is
understood the Queen paid a warm tribute to the General's fearless
qualities as a soldier, and to his magnificent services to the
nation; while she sympathetically referred to the fact, that in every
campaign in which he had taken a part previously, with the exception
of the Soudan war of 1898, he had had the misfortune to be wounded.

Seldom has so general and so spontaneous an expression of public
feeling been given in this country.  In Scotland especially was this
so, as might naturally be expected.  In Edinburgh, where both the
Black Watch and the Gordon Highlanders had recently been stationed,
the death of Colonel Downman of the Gordons, and many others with him
in the same engagement, gave a sharper edge to the calamity.
Lieutenant F. G. Tail, also well known in Edinburgh, and popular all
over the country as a champion golfer, was wounded on this occasion.
After his recovery he went again to the front and was killed on 7th
February at Koodoosberg Drift.  From Mr. Low's record of his life it
is interesting to quote what he says as to the Black Watch at
Magersfontein, inasmuch as it differs somewhat from the despatch of
Lord Methuen already quoted, and expresses the opinion of one who was
on the spot.  'The papers say the Highland Brigade retired and
re-formed.  The Black Watch never did; and, furthermore, we held our
ground all day.'  As to his commanding officer he says, 'General
Wauchope is in no way responsible for the fearful loss of life
amongst the Highland Brigade: he got his orders, and had to carry
them out, and he was killed in front of his brigade.'




{198}

CHAPTER XI

CHARACTERISTICS

[Sidenote: A devoted soldier]

That General Wauchope was a skilled officer goes without saying.  He
had made military tactics his life study.  And he had the personal
influence that enabled men to follow his leadership without
hesitation.  Several of his brother officers who had been with him
for years, and had fought beside him in many a battle, have favoured
us with their opinion of his skill as a commander; and, as to his
responsibility for the blunder or misadventure of Magersfontein, one
of them says: 'As a commanding officer, he was beloved by all ranks;
respected as a born leader of men, for he had but to hold up his
little finger and the whole regiment would have followed him
to--anywhere!  He brought the battalion to a wonderful pitch of
excellency, both in professional and social success, and invariably
received the highest praise from every general officer who ever
inspected them.'  And from another we have the remarkable testimony:
'Wauchope diligently studied his profession, to which he was devoted,
and was noted in his regiment for his coolness and judgment.  I say
this with special reference to the circumstances preceding his
lamentable death, and the loss of a large part of the Highland
Brigade recently in South Africa.  Eminently a cool and cautious
leader, Wauchope would have never led his brigade in close formation
into the very {199} jaws of destruction without scouting or other
means of discovering the near proximity of the enemy, unless he had
had direct stringent orders to do so.'  From still another
distinguished officer comes the following: 'General Wauchope's name
as a soldier was known to all ranks in the army, and I am certain
that time will prove that he was not responsible for the decimation
of the brigade he loved so well.  He was far too good a tactician for
that blunder.'

It will be seen as our narrative has proceeded, that while the career
of Andrew Gilbert Wauchope of Niddrie is in the main that of an
earnest, devoted soldier of the Crown, full of chequered incident and
varied experience, there is at the same time a many-sidedness of
character developed in his life.  A soldier first, he was as much at
home, it has been said, in the commonplace business of the local
School Board and Parish Council, or in the transactions of the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland.  Essentially a modest
man, he never made an affectation of superiority, and indeed he was
much inclined to underrate his own ability in almost every work in
which he was engaged.  As a politician he knew his own mind, and he
had become one of the clearest and most humorous exponents of the
policy which he advocated.  Great in arms, he was equally great in
the arts of peace; and while professionally attached to his duties as
a soldier, he had a horror of war, and an unbounded appreciation of
the blessings of peace.

Those who knew him best, who had lived with him in barracks or camp,
who shared with him the dangers of war, bear witness to his many kind
deeds, and his sympathetic interest in others, of his kind-hearted
generosity, his homeliness, and general simplicity of heart.  He was
{200} indeed a typical Scotsman, possessing all the best
characteristics of a Scotsman, with no fear in his heart but the fear
of God, or, as one has described him--'A man among men, and a man of
God.'

[Sidenote: Honoured by all]

To the people on his estate he was more than anything else a father,
in his interest and care; the active patron of everything that was
worthy, the participator in all that was helpful to their life; the
benefactor whose liberal hand supplied many a need, and brightened
and blessed many a home.  When the news of his death came from South
Africa, all ranks and classes united in lamenting the fall of a brave
and a good man, of one who would be much missed, of one who could ill
be spared.  'From the Queen on the throne to some of her humblest
subjects, through all ranks of statesmen and politicians of all
shades of opinion, from soldiers and from sailors of all grades, and
most affectionately from the rank and file of his own historic
regiment, from newspapers throughout the length and breadth of the
land, from neighbours and friends--and who were not his friends who
knew him?--even from opponents; in short, from all classes, the
highest and the humblest, came tributes of respect and eulogy, and
expressions of sorrow over what seemed, at first thought, his
untimely end.'

As it has been well said, 'the simple record of his campaigns and
wounds, in the service of Queen and country, would alone be
sufficient to confer greatness on any man.  His was the truest
greatness, because he was so utterly unconscious that it was great;
and his extreme modesty, and almost diffidence, obscured it from the
merely superficial observer.'

His was the kind of life that exerted a magnetic charm upon all with
whom he had dealings.  His plain exterior, {201} his somewhat awkward
gait and habiliments, more frequently marked by the absence of
fashionable conventionality than by military smartness, were a
deception to a stranger.  'That the great Captain Wauchope!' said a
man on the road one day, when he was pointed out to him as the hero
of Tel-el-Kebir--'_That_ Captain Wauchope, impossible!  I thought
that was a labourer!'  Though carrying no outward symbol of what was
in him, to his friends he was dear.  But we do not always gather
diamonds on the surface.  ''Tis the mind that makes the body rich.'
He seemed best to those who knew him longest, for about his actions
there was a sincerity that was all the better because it was
spontaneous; and behind that bronzed, ascetic face--said by some to
resemble that of Cicero or Cæsar--there was a soul with the courage
of a hero and the tenderness of a woman.

In a letter from Dr. Wisely of Malta, we have striking testimony in
confirmation of this.  'Wauchope,' he says, 'in a remarkable manner
fulfilled the New Testament injunction to "honour all men," and this,
I believe, was the secret of his being honoured by all, for he was
liked and trusted by all sorts and conditions of men.  His brother
officers found in him a friend, and so did the men in the ranks.  If
any man had a grievance he was sure of getting a fair hearing from
him.  But Wauchope was not easily taken in.  I remember seeing him
once standing in the street when I was speaking to a man of his
regiment, who had seen better days.  After the man had left me, he
came up and said, "I was just waiting to warn you, lest you should be
taken in by that man.  He will tell you plausible stories to get
money out of you, but don't listen to him.  He is a humbug, and is
not to be trusted."  I found he was right.  But when there was {202}
real distress, Wauchope was ever ready to do what he could to relieve
it, and he did it in the most unostentatious way.  In 1878, when he
went with his regiment to Cyprus, a man in his company, whom I knew,
died of heat apoplexy on landing.  Wauchope immediately wrote to me
and enclosed a cheque for £10, to be given to the man's widow to help
her, as he said, to make a fresh start.  I happened to mention this
incident recently to a lady, whose husband at one time commanded the
regiment, and she said "it was just like Wauchope," and that she knew
of many similar cases where his help was as quietly given.  On one
occasion, when the regiment was in Egypt, he presented a cheque for
£200, to be expended, he informed me, for the benefit of the women of
the regiment, on the one sole condition that his name should not be
mentioned.  He had his own way, however, of dispensing charity, and
was not afraid to refuse to subscribe to objects merely because other
people subscribed and thought he ought to do so too.  He judged for
himself.  And he did so, not only regarding cases of charity, but in
whatever he had to do with.  Some years ago we happened to be
speaking of his tenants in Scotland, and he told me that he made a
point of occasionally seeing each one alone, without a factor or any
one being present, and he would ask the tenant to speak frankly to
him, and let him know of any grievance he had to complain of.  He did
not promise to agree with him, or to see things in the same light,
but he promised to give the case a fair hearing, and to do his best
to remedy the grievance, if he was convinced that there was one.'

[Sidenote: A religious life]

It is not difficult to discern that the secret spring of such a life
is to be found not so much in early education, social influences,
rank, ample means, or even {203} natural kind-heartedness--though
these doubtless had a certain influence in the formation of
character--as in that fervent, devout spirit which characterised
nearly all that he said or did--in short, from that 'fear of the Lord
which is the beginning of wisdom.'  Wauchope's life was indeed a
deeply religious life.  Not religious certainly in the conventional
sense of the term, that looks to the repetition of favourite texts of
Scripture and the recurrence of pious sentiments; but in the
deep-down utterances of a devout heart that sought the expression of
his faith rather in deeds of kindness and thoughtful sympathy.  His
whole life, as we have seen, was saturated with affection for those
in life's path who were bound to him by kindred ties, and for whom
his quick eye saw his help was needed.  Yet, let it be said, he
shrank from no opportunity which presented itself of making a good
confession before men, or of giving religious comfort, or engaging in
religious services, where he might be able to do good.  His daily
duties, he once remarked to a company of Sabbath-school boys, were
largely influenced by his morning devotions.  The early training of a
Scottish home, with a pious father's example, laid the foundation of
a religious life, which after-trouble and affliction more fully
developed into ripe conviction, and matured Christian faith.  He
believed in prayer and in family worship, and it was doubtless this
that so much imbued him with strength and courage for many a day of
arduous work and patient pain.  How else can we explain that trying
period of his life when in Malta, with a drawn sword, as it were,
hanging over his head, and only a step between him and death?  There
he sought to know of the doctrine whether it be of God, and with
reverent fear put himself into his Saviour's hands, with the desire
to do God's will in every duty that fell to him.  'He {204} followed
on to know the Lord,' says Dr. Wisely of Malta, 'and he came to know
the truth of the Gospel, not only as a truth of faith, but a truth of
personal experience.'

How else can we explain that impressive scene at the grave in Cyprus
shortly afterwards, when in the absence of the chaplain he stepped
forward, and in the midst of his hushed and weeping comrades,
touchingly performed the last offices over the dead?

All through his life it was the same.  Consistent and true, but
without affectation, in his relationship to God and to man, he sought
to have a conscience void of offence, and to do his duty as in view
of the Eternal.

[Illustration: THE GRAVE AT MATJESFONTEIN.  Marked by Wreath on left
of the Cross.]

Fearless of death, and accustomed to meet it on many occasions, he
dreaded it the less that he fully realised the after-issues.  It has
been well said that the man who has no place for death in his
philosophy has not learned to live.  The lesson of life is death.
For Wauchope, death had no terrors, because it had been overcome
through faith in Him who has conquered death and the grave.  The
pathos of life was with him no forced sentiment, for he had often
felt the pity for suffering and bereavement which underlies all true
life.  In his own family and person he had experienced the loss of
loved ones, and known the grief and disappointments of a bereaved
father.  Such experiences broaden out sympathy and cause 'the primal
duties shine aloft like stars.'  In his own parish of Liberton he
discharged the office of the eldership with much acceptance, visiting
among the parishioners, and officiating at the communion in the
parish church; leading a quiet, useful, unobtrusive life, doing good
where he had opportunity.  On several occasions a representative
elder in the highest court of the Scottish Church, he took an active
part in the work of the General Assembly.  {205} There indeed he was
a prominent figure, as he would sometimes take his seat in his
military uniform fresh from his duties as the officer commanding the
Black Watch at the Castle.  The Church of Scotland had no more true
and loyal son, and in many ways he identified himself with her
interests, and was always ready to testify to the value of the
national recognition of religion.  He was for some time vice-convener
of the Church's Committee on Temperance, and had he been spared
longer, his ripe judgment, his knowledge of men, and his own personal
experience would doubtless have been of much service in the
advancement of this important cause.

[Sidenote: An elder of the Church]

In 1895 he was chosen as one of the deputies by the Assembly to
represent the Church of Scotland at the General Assembly of the Irish
Presbyterian Church, which met in Belfast in June of that year.  In
introducing him to the Assembly, the Rev. Professor Todd Martin, the
Moderator, paid a high tribute to his abilities as a soldier, and
spoke of the courage and bravery with which he had faced the Right
Honourable W. E. Gladstone, the greatest political general of the
age.  'Colonel Wauchope,' he said, 'had won for himself the
admiration and love of his most strenuous opponents.  They honoured
him, however, specially because he took his place from year to year
as a ruling elder of the Presbyterian Church, and entered with great
enthusiasm into the maintenance of their Presbyterian faith, to the
advocacy of the simplicity of ritual, and to the furtherance of
temperance and every other good cause that was for the salvation of
the great body of the people.'  Wauchope's address, which, according
to the prints of the day, was 'long, eloquent, and deeply
interesting,' feelingly referred at the outset to his Irish
connection through his mother; and after pointing out the {206}
dangers surrounding the Protestant population of Scotland and
Ireland, and the necessity for more united sympathy for each other,
he concluded as follows:--'I thank you, Moderator of this vast
Assembly, for the kind manner in which you have been pleased to
receive me as a member of the Church of Scotland.  I am proud, and I
cannot say how proud, to be a member of it.  It is also a matter of
great thankfulness to all of us, especially to us laymen, that now in
the Church of Scotland we have elders--men of great transcendent
ability--who love their Church, and work loyally as Christian men for
the furtherance of that great Church.'

[Sidenote: A Christian gentleman]

He had a high ideal of the Church's duty, and so far at least as in
him lay he sought to take his share of that duty.  In the cause of
temperance he had done much among his soldiers, and in the Assembly
he was ever the eloquent advocate of its claims upon the attention of
the Church.

To one like him, more accustomed to the political platform and the
style of address there required than to the ecclesiastical forms of
the Church, it was natural he should sometimes forget the ceremonial
style peculiar to the General Assembly.  On one occasion he rose to
second a motion, and inadvertently addressed the venerable Assembly
not as 'Fathers and Brethren,' but as 'Gentlemen,' which immediately
caused a titter to pass over the House.  He at once became conscious
of his mistake, and turning to the chair, said, 'Moderator, I am no
theologian, nor am I an ecclesiastic; I am a soldier; I second the
motion.'  The brevity and pointed nature of this short speech drew
out an appreciative cheer, and the motion was carried _nem. con_.

Though loving and serving his own Church faithfully {207} and well,
General Wauchope was no sectarian.  He had seen too much of the world
not to take a wide view of the brotherhood of Christianity.  As the
different regiments of one army serving a common cause, he viewed the
various sections of the Church of Christ--whether Roman Catholic or
Protestant, whether Established Church or Nonconformist, whether
Episcopal or Presbyterian--as all members one with another of the
great army of which the Lord Jesus Christ is the one Captain and
Head.  He could, and often did, extend a helping hand to one and all
as he had opportunity.  'Wherever I am wanted, I shall be there,
straight,' was his prompt and witty reply once to a 'heckler' at one
of his political meetings, when asked how it was possible for him to
serve both in Parliament and in the army.  The same answer might have
been given as to church and philanthropic demands made upon his
sympathy.  'Wherever he was wanted' to advance any good object, he
was ready to be 'there, straight.'

The spontaneous references made after his death from nearly every
pulpit in Midlothian, and in various churches in England and
Scotland--too numerous to quote--and the more formal deliverance of
the General Assembly in May 1900, all bear testimony to the nation's
grief over the loss of one who could ill be spared.  These
expressions may be found fittingly summarised in the words of one who
knew the General well, and who was accustomed to experience his
influence in his own parish of Liberton.  The Rev. George Dodds, of
the Free Church there, in concluding a memorial service in his
church, and taking as his text 2 Samuel i. 25--'How are the mighty
fallen in the midst of the battle!  O Jonathan, slain in thine high
places,' spoke as follows:--'Nothing which has hitherto {208}
occurred,' he said, 'and perhaps no casualty which can yet happen,
could to any greater extent quicken our imagination to realise the
horrors of war, and the desperate work these brave men face who fight
our battles.  The people of this parish will always remember the
battle of Magersfontein as that which deprived them of one of whom
they were more than proud.  General Wauchope was a man whom every one
loved, and it was little wonder.  Anything else was impossible.  A
man so real, with no vestige of the actor about him; so free from
narrowness both in church and political creed; so generous as a
patron, so philanthropic as a gentleman among his people; so
honourable as a public man, so brotherly as a neighbour--when shall
we look upon his like again? ... Liberton parish knows what the army
and the empire have lost, but our loss is one of those sacred things
with which no outsider can intermeddle....  Much which I could tell
of him makes me know with undying conviction that Andrew Gilbert
Wauchope of Niddrie was one of the finest Christian gentlemen one
could find in a lifetime.'

  'Soldier, rest! thy warfare o'er,
    Sleep the sleep that knows no breaking;
  Dream of battlefields no more,
    Days of danger, nights of waking.
  No rude sound shall reach thine ear;
    Armour's clang, or war-steed champing;
  Trump nor pibroch summon here,
    Mustering clan or squadron tramping.'




{209}

INDEX

Abu-Hammed, 147.

Albert, Prince, 32.

Aldershot, 38, 75.

Alexandria, 73, 74, 90, 106.

Alfred, Prince, Duke of Edinburgh, 32, 33, 34, 107.

Alison, Sir Archibald, 76.

Arabi Pasha, 73, 79, 163.

Ashanti, 39, 46, 49.

Assouan, 93, 105.

Atbara River, 148, 151, 155.



Babington, Major-General, 187.

Baird, Sir David, 21.

---- Sir James Gardiner, 47.

---- Robert, 21.

---- of Newbyth, William, 21.

Balfour, Dr. Andrew, 135, 163.

Ballater, 141.

Balmoral, 33.

Bayly, Colonel R. K., 11, 39, 75, 92, 99, 105, 107, 180.

Belfast, 120, 205.

Benson, Major, 185, 186.

Berber, 149, 152.

Beresford, Lord Charles, 11, 30.

Bermuda, 33.

Biddulph, Sir Robert, 59, 66, 92, 129.

Black Watch, 36, 40, 75, 84, 86, 92, 99, 105, 123, 131, 140, 144,
163, 179, 181, 183, 196.

_Britannia_, H.M.S., 30.

Buccleuch, Duke of, 109, 127.

Buller, Sir Redvers, 41, 42, 90, 101.



Cairo, 74, 78, 80, 84, 86, 90, 105.

Cambo, 82, 87, 88.

Cameron Highlanders, 149, 150, 151, 152.

Cameron, Sir Daniel, 132.

Cape Colony, 21, 71, 178, 182, 193.

Chamberlain, Right Hon. Joseph, 172.

Charles Edward, 20.

---- I., 19, 20.

---- II., 20.

Christie, Captain, 37.

Church of Scotland, 124, 161, 199, 204, 206.

Colville, Sir Henry, 187.

Convention of Estates, 20.

Cox, Robert, M. P., 166.

Craigmillar, 17, 26.

Cyprus, 58, 67, 75, 92, 202.



Dalrymple, Sir Charles, 109, 113, 124, 126, 137, 138, 157.

Devonport, 38.

Dewar, Mr. Arthur, 166, 167, 169, 170.

Dodds, Rev. George, 135, 207.

Douglas, Earls of, 14.

Downman, Colonel, 179, 188, 197.

Duff, Major A. G., 11, 59, 63, 79, 181.

Dufferin, Marquis of, 164.

Dundee, Viscount, 20.



Earle, Major-General, 99, 100.

Ed-Damer, 148.

Edinburgh, 38, 75, 133, 140, 142, 196.

---- Duke of. _See_ Alfred, Prince.

---- University, 164.

---- South, Election, 166, 170.

Egan, Charlie, 135.

Egerton, Hon. Francis, 32.

Egypt, 72, 75, 76, 81, 84, 89, 94, 147, 202.

Elliot, Admiral, 32.

Erskine, Sir Thomas, 82.



Foster's School, Gosport, 29.


Gatacre, Major-General, 150, 154, 156, 159, 161, 181.

Gibraltar, 11, 75, 107, 111, 114, 120.

Gifford, Lord, 42.

Gironard, Lieutenant, 148.

Gladstone, Right Hon. W. E., 70, 109-129, 166, 168, 205.

Gordon, General, 89, 93, 98, 101, 146.

Gordon Highlanders, 179, 183, 188, 190.

Gregor, Clan, 18.

Grant, Professor Sir Ludovic, 164.

Guards' Brigade, 187, 189, 191.



Halifax, 32.

Harley, Colonel, 39.

Hamley, Sir E., 80.

Highland Brigade, 9, 76, 185, 188, 193, 194, 198.

Holyroodhouse, 16, 19, 34.

Hopetoun, Earl of, 24, 196.

Hughes-Hallett, Lieut.-Col., 186, 188.

Hunter, General, 149, 150, 154.

Hythe, 38.



Ireland, Rev. Robert H., 52.



James V., 16.

---- VI., 18.



Kass-el-Nil Barracks, 81, 85.

Keith Lords Marischal, 14.

Khalifa Abdullahi, 146.

Khartoum, 92, 98, 101, 146, 147, 152, 158.

King Koffee, 43.

Kitchener, Lord, 102, 144, 147, 159.

Kimberley, 178, 183, 184.

Kirbekan, battle of, 99.

Knox, John, 17.

Kruger, President, 173, 174, 181.

Kumasi, 45.



Ladysmith, 178.

Lauderdale, Duke of, 20.

Liberton, 135, 162, 179.

Limerick Barracks, 129, 131.

Lloyd, Henry, 33.

Lochtour, 20.

Logan, Hon. J. D., 193.



Macdonald, General, 149, 150, 154, 159, 160, 195.

M'Gaw, Sergeant, 61.

M'Leod, Sir John C., 11, 36, 42, 44, 56, 132.

M'Neil, Sir John, 41.

Mactaggart, Rev. John, 12, 86, 95, 100, 103.

Mafeking, 178.

Magersfontein, 184, 192, 208.

Matjesfontein, 193.

Malcolm Caenmore, 14.

Mahdi, 89, 92, 101, 105, 146, 153.

Mahmoud, 149.

Majuba Hill, 70, 172.

Malta, 53, 106, 203.

Martin, Professor Todd, 205.

---- Robert, 128, 180.

Maryhill, 75, 107, 131, 133.

Methuen, Lord, 178, 182, 183, 185, 189, 193, 198.

Midlothian campaign, 109, 113, 121, 123, 126.

Miller, Hugh, 22.

Modder River, 182, 184, 192.

Muir, Sir William, 134, 164.



Natal, 177, 178, 180, 182.

New Craighall, 113, 134, 137, 139, 157, 162, 179.

Niddrie Marischal, 13, 19, 81, 133, 157, 160, 163, 167.

Niddrie, 25, 34, 87, 134, 136, 157, 160, 163, 178.

Nile Expeditions, 95, 97, 99, 103, 105, 146, 152, 156.



Omdurman, 146, 152, 153, 155, 160.

Orange Free State, 177, 182.

Osman Digna, 148,



Papho, Cyprus, 59.

Parker, F. H., 60.

Pinkney, Sergeant, 79, 80

Pope Paul III., 15, 16.

Portobello, 26, 46, 162.

Presbyterian Church, 103, 143, 155.



'Red Mick,' 36, 142.

Rennie, Captain, 181, 194.

Restalrig, church of, 16.

Roberts, Sir F., or Lord, 172.

Robertson, Rev. J., 191, 193, 194.

Rosebery, Lord, 125.

Rossyth, 19.



Salisbury, Lord, 67, 110, 123, 126, 168.

Sandilands, Sir James, 19.

St. Andrews, 82.

_St. George_, H.M.S., 31, 33, 35, 107.

Seaforth Highlanders, 152, 179, 186, 188.

Selborne, Lord, 174.

Seymour, Sir Beauchamp, 73, 74.

Shepstone, Sir Theophilus, 70.

Stirling Castle, 36.

Stirling, Rev. Alexander, 12, 143.

Soudan, the, 89, 92, 146.

South Africa, 68, 173, 199.

Spottiswood, 18.

Steyn, President, 181.

Suakim, 146.

Suez Canal, 72, 75, 76.

Sussex Manoeuvres, 141.

Sutherland Highlanders, 186.

Symons, General, 180.



Tait, F. G., 197.

Tel-el-Kebir, 74, 76, 78, 115, 147, 201.

Transvaal, 68, 168, 172, 177.

Trent, Council of, 15.

Trinkitat, 90.



Uitlander Grievances, 173, 175, 177.



Ventry, Lord and Lady, 24, 47, 196.



Wady Halfa, 94, 105, 147, 148.

Wallace, Sir William, 23.

Ware, Sir James, 15.

Wauchope, Andrew, 21, 22, 34.

---- Sir Francis, 19.

---- George, 17.

---- Gilbert, 16, 17.

---- James, 23.

---- Robert, Archbishop, 14,

---- Thomas, 14.

---- William, 21, 22.

---- Major William, 53, 81.

Wellington, Duke of, 79.

Windsor, 161.

Wisely, Dr. George, 12, 55, 65, 106.

Wood, Sir Evelyn, 41, 172.

Wood, Provost, Portobello, 47.

Worksop, school at, 29.

Wolseley, Sir G., or Lord, 40, 46, 59, 76, 90, 92, 98, 101, 104, 164,
166, 201,



Yetholm, 20, 25, 137, 158.

York, Cardinal, 20.

York, city, 140, 141, 144.



Zagazig, 76, 79, 80.



  Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to Her Majesty
  at the Edinburgh University Press



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GENERAL WAUCHOPE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


