The Project Gutenberg eBook of Historical Record of the Sixty-first, or the South Gloucestershire Regiment of Foot
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Historical Record of the Sixty-first, or the South Gloucestershire Regiment of Foot

Author: Richard Cannon


        
Release date: October 29, 2021 [eBook #66629]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/66629

Credits: Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FIRST, OR THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT OF FOOT ***

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  A superscript is denoted by ^x or ^{xx}, for example reg^t or 1^{er}.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have been
  placed at the end of the book.

  The tables in this book are best viewed using a monospace font.

  The large wide table on page 67 and 68 in the original book has been
  split into two parts, with the first column repeated in the second
  part.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




  HISTORICAL RECORDS

  OF

  THE BRITISH ARMY.




GENERAL ORDERS.


  _HORSE-GUARDS_,
  _1st January, 1836_.

His Majesty has been pleased to command, that, with a view of doing
the fullest justice to Regiments, as well as to Individuals who
have distinguished themselves by their Bravery in Action with the
Enemy, an Account of the Services of every Regiment in the British
Army shall be published under the superintendence and direction
of the Adjutant-General; and that this Account shall contain the
following particulars, viz.,

---- The Period and Circumstances of the Original Formation of
the Regiment; The Stations at which it has been from time to time
employed; The Battles, Sieges, and other Military Operations, in
which it has been engaged, particularly specifying any Achievement
it may have performed, and the Colours, Trophies, &c., it may have
captured from the Enemy.

---- The Names of the Officers and the number of Non-Commissioned
Officers and Privates, Killed or Wounded by the Enemy, specifying
the Place and Date of the Action.

---- The Names of those Officers, who, in consideration of their
Gallant Services and Meritorious Conduct in Engagements with the
Enemy, have been distinguished with Titles, Medals, or other Marks
of His Majesty’s gracious favour.

---- The Names of all such Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers and
Privates as may have specially signalized themselves in Action.

And,

---- The Badges and Devices which the Regiment may have been
permitted to bear, and the Causes on account of which such Badges
or Devices, or any other Marks of Distinction, have been granted.

  By Command of the Right Honourable
  GENERAL LORD HILL,
  _Commanding-in-Chief_.

  JOHN MACDONALD,
  _Adjutant-General_.




PREFACE.


The character and credit of the British Army must chiefly depend
upon the zeal and ardour, by which all who enter into its service
are animated, and consequently it is of the highest importance that
any measure calculated to excite the spirit of emulation, by which
alone great and gallant actions are achieved, should be adopted.

Nothing can more fully tend to the accomplishment of this desirable
object, than a full display of the noble deeds with which the
Military History of our country abounds. To hold forth these bright
examples to the imitation of the youthful soldier, and thus to
incite him to emulate the meritorious conduct of those who have
preceded him in their honourable career, are among the motives that
have given rise to the present publication.

The operations of the British Troops are, indeed, announced in the
“London Gazette,” from whence they are transferred into the public
prints: the achievements of our armies are thus made known at the
time of their occurrence, and receive the tribute of praise and
admiration to which they are entitled. On extraordinary occasions,
the Houses of Parliament have been in the habit of conferring on
the Commanders, and the Officers and Troops acting under their
orders, expressions of approbation and of thanks for their skill
and bravery, and these testimonials, confirmed by the high honour
of their Sovereign’s Approbation, constitute the reward which the
soldier most highly prizes.

It has not, however, until late years, been the practice (which
appears to have long prevailed in some of the Continental armies)
for British Regiments to keep regular records of their services
and achievements. Hence some difficulty has been experienced in
obtaining, particularly from the old Regiments, an authentic
account of their origin and subsequent services.

This defect will now be remedied, in consequence of His Majesty
having been pleased to command, that every Regiment shall in future
keep a full and ample record of its services at home and abroad.

From the materials thus collected, the country will henceforth
derive information as to the difficulties and privations which
chequer the career of those who embrace the military profession. In
Great Britain, where so large a number of persons are devoted to
the active concerns of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, and
where these pursuits have, for so long a period, been undisturbed
by the _presence of war_, which few other countries have escaped,
comparatively little is known of the vicissitudes of active
service, and of the casualties of climate, to which, even during
peace, the British Troops are exposed in every part of the globe,
with little or no interval of repose.

In their tranquil enjoyment of the blessings which the country
derives from the industry and the enterprise of the agriculturist
and the trader, its happy inhabitants may be supposed not often to
reflect on the perilous duties of the soldier and the sailor,--on
their sufferings,--and on the sacrifice of valuable life, by which
so many national benefits are obtained and preserved.

The conduct of the British Troops, their valour, and endurance,
have shone conspicuously under great and trying difficulties; and
their character has been established in Continental warfare by the
irresistible spirit with which they have effected debarkations in
spite of the most formidable opposition, and by the gallantry and
steadiness with which they have maintained their advantages against
superior numbers.

In the official Reports made by the respective Commanders, ample
justice has generally been done to the gallant exertions of the
Corps employed; but the details of their services, and of acts of
individual bravery, can only be fully given in the Annals of the
various Regiments.

These Records are now preparing for publication, under His
Majesty’s special authority, by Mr. RICHARD CANNON, Principal Clerk
of the Adjutant-General’s Office; and while the perusal of them
cannot fail to be useful and interesting to military men of every
rank, it is considered that they will also afford entertainment and
information to the general reader, particularly to those who may
have served in the Army, or who have relatives in the Service.

There exists in the breasts of most of those who have served,
or are serving, in the Army, an _Esprit de Corps_--an attachment
to every thing belonging to their Regiment; to such persons a
narrative of the services of their own Corps cannot fail to prove
interesting. Authentic accounts of the actions of the great,--the
valiant,--the loyal, have always been of paramount interest with
a brave and civilized people. Great Britain has produced a race
of heroes who, in moments of danger and terror, have stood, “firm
as the rocks of their native shore;” and when half the World has
been arrayed against them, they have fought the battles of their
Country with unshaken fortitude. It is presumed that a record of
achievements in war,--victories so complete and surprising, gained
by our countrymen,--our brothers,--our fellow-citizens in arms,--a
record which revives the memory of the brave, and brings their
gallant deeds before us, will certainly prove acceptable to the
public.

Biographical memoirs of the Colonels and other distinguished
Officers, will be introduced in the Records of their respective
Regiments, and the Honorary Distinctions which have, from time to
time, been conferred upon each Regiment, as testifying the value
and importance of its services, will be faithfully set forth.

As a convenient mode of Publication, the Record of each Regiment
will be printed in a distinct number, so that when the whole shall
be completed, the Parts may be bound up in numerical succession.




  HISTORICAL RECORD

  OF

  THE SIXTY-FIRST,

  OR, THE

  SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT

  OF

  FOOT:

  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF

  THE FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT
  IN 1758,

  AND OF

  ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES
  TO 1844.


  _ILLUSTRATED WITH A PLATE OF THE COLOURS AND
  UNIFORM._


  LONDON:
  PARKER, FURNIVALL, AND PARKER,
  _MILITARY LIBRARY, WHITEHALL_.

  M.DCCC.XLIV.




  LONDON:
  HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS,
  ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




  THE SIXTY-FIRST,

  OR, THE

  SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT

  OF

  FOOT,

  BEARS ON ITS REGIMENTAL COLOUR THE WORD

  “EGYPT,”

  WITH THE SPHINX:

  ALSO THE WORDS

  “TALAVERA,” “SALAMANCA,” “PYRENEES,”
  “NIVELLE,” “NIVE,” “ORTHES,”
  “TOULOUSE,” “PENINSULA,”

  TO COMMEMORATE ITS HEROIC CONDUCT IN THESE ACTIONS.


  THE FLANK COMPANIES

  ALSO BEAR ON THEIR APPOINTMENTS THE WORD

  “MAIDA,”

  IN TESTIMONY OF THEIR DISTINGUISHED GALLANTRY
  AT THE BATTLE OF MAIDA ON
  THE 4TH OF JULY,
  1806.




  CONTENTS.


  Year                                                          Page

  1758  Formation of the Regiment                                 10

  ----  Names of Officers                                         --

  ----  Embarks for the West Indies                               11

  1759  Capture of Guadeloupe                                     --

  1760  Returns to England                                        12

  1763  Proceeds to Ireland                                       --

  1771  Stationed at Minorca                                      --

  1782  Returns to England                                        15

  ----  Styled the South Gloucestershire Regiment                 --

  1783  Proceeds to Ireland                                       --

  1792  Embarks for Gibraltar                                     --

  1794  Proceeds to the West Indies                               --

  1795  Attack on St. Lucia                                       --

  1796  Returns to England                                        16

  1797  Proceeds to Guernsey                                      --

  1798  Embarks for the Cape of Good Hope                         --

  1801  Expedition to Egypt                                       17

  1803  Embarks for Malta                                         18

  ----  A Second Battalion added to the establishment             --

  1804  Second Battalion proceeds to Guernsey                     19

  1805  First Battalion proceeds to Italy                         --

  1806  Second Battalion proceeds to Ireland                      20

  ----  Battle of Maida                                           21

  1807  Second Battalion returns to England                       22

  ----  First Battalion proceeds to Gibraltar                     23

  1809  ---- ---- ---- ---- Portugal                              --

  ----  Battle of Talavera                                        --

  1810  Second Battalion proceeds to Ireland                      25

  ----  Battle of Busaco                                          --

  1811  Blockade of the Fortress of Almeida                       27

  1812  Siege of Ciudad Rodrigo                                   28

  ----  ---- ---- the Forts of San Vincente, St. Cajetano,
          and La Merced                                           --

  ----  Battle of Salamanca                                       29

  ----  Siege of Burgos Castle                                    33

  1813  Battle of the Pyrenees                                    35

  ----  Passage of the Nivelle                                    37

  ----  ---- ---- ---- Nive                                       39

  1814  Blockade of Bayonne                                       40

  ----  Battle of Orthes                                          --

  ----  ---- ---- Toulouse                                        41

  ----  Embarks for Ireland                                       45

  ----  Second Battalion disbanded                                46

  1816  Proceeds to England                                       --

  ----  Embarks for Jamaica                                       --

  1822  Returns to England                                        --

  1824  Proceeds to Ireland                                       --

  1828  Embarks for Ceylon                                        47

  1840  Returns to England                                        49

  1843  Proceeds to Ireland                                       52

  ----  Conclusion                                                53


  SUCCESSION OF COLONELS.

  1758  Granville Elliott                                         55

  1759  George Gray                                               --

  1768  John Gore                                                 56

  1773  John Barlow                                               --

  1778  Staates Long Morriss                                      57

  1800  Sir George Hewett, Bart., G.C.B.                          --

  1840  Sir John Gardiner, K.C.B.                                 58

  1844  Sir Jeremiah Dickson, K.C.B.                              --


  APPENDIX.

  1801  Lieut.-Colonel Barlow’s Journal of the March of a
          Detachment from Cosseir to Kenè                         59

  1809 }
   to  }  Casualties during the Peninsular War                    67
  1814 }


  PLATE.

  Colours, and Present Costume, to face page                       9


[Illustration: SIXTY-FIRST (THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE) REGIMENT OF
FOOT.]


[Illustration: SIXTY-FIRST (THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE) REGIMENT OF
FOOT.]




HISTORICAL RECORD

OF THE

SIXTY-FIRST,

OR

THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT

OF

FOOT.


[Sidenote: 1755]

[Sidenote: 1756]

In the early part of the eighteenth century, the British Colonies
in North America were extended along the coast;--at the same
time, the Indian trade drew many persons into the interior of the
country, where they found a delightful climate, and a fruitful
soil; and a company of merchants obtained a charter for a tract
of land beyond the Allegany Mountains, where they commenced
establishing a settlement. The French laid claim to this part
of the country, drove away the settlers, and erected a fort to
command the entrance into the lands on the Ohio and the Mississippi
rivers. These aggressions giving indication of an approaching war,
the British army was augmented in the winter of 1755-6, and that
distinguished veteran corps, the THIRD REGIMENT OF FOOT, OR THE
BUFFS, was increased in numbers to twenty-two companies, and was
divided into two battalions in 1756.

[Sidenote: 1757]

In the summer of 1757, the THIRD Regiment formed part of an
expedition against the coast of France, the land forces being under
General Sir John Mordaunt, and the fleet commanded by Admiral
Sir Edward Hawke. The _Isle of Aix_ was captured in September,
and an attack on Rochefort was contemplated; but the wind proved
unfavourable, and the fleet returned to England.

[Sidenote: 1758]

In the spring of 1758, the SECOND BATTALION of the BUFFS was
constituted the “SIXTY-FIRST REGIMENT,” under the command of
Major-General Granville Elliott, from the Austrian service, by
commission dated the 21st of April; the lieut.-colonelcy was
conferred on Major John Barlow, of the Buff’s, and the majority
on Captain Christopher Teesdale, senior captain of the Buffs. The
Regiment, being thus formed from the THIRD Foot, was permitted to
assume the Buff facing.

After its formation, the regiment was encamped at Chatham, with the
Thirty-seventh and Sixty-fifth, under Major-General the Earl of
Panmure.

The following officers were holding commissions in the regiment:--

  _Colonel_, MAJOR-GENERAL GRANVILLE ELLIOTT.
  _Lieut.-Colonel_, JOHN BARLOW.
  _Major_, CHRISTOPHER TEESDALE.


  _Captains._

  James Patterson
  A. Singleton
  Thomas Hardcastle
  M. Brabazon
  Roger Crowle
  William Buckley
  John Barford


  _Captain-Lieutenant._

  William Gunning


  _Lieutenants._

  John Acklom
  W. Peyton
  John Rowland
  John Waugh
  John Read
  N. Doolan
  Peter Maturin
  S. Pearce
  John Poole
  William Wilson
  F. Blomberg
  A. Leishman
  D. Gilchrist
  Thomas Brown
  G. V. Chetwode
  R. Beatson
  R. Kelly
  J. Badger


  _Ensigns._

  John Skinner
  John Ireland
  Jarvis Palmer
  John Keir
  Edward Crowe
  Samuel Horner
  James Savage
  John Arbuthnot

  _Chaplain_, George Shaw;
  _Adjutant_, William Gunning;
  _Surgeon_, Peter Johnston;
  _Quarter-Master_, Samuel Grey.

Towards the end of the year the regiment embarked for the West
Indies, with the armament sent against the French West India
Islands, under Major-General Hopson and Commodore Moore.

[Sidenote: 1759]

On the 16th of January, 1759, the troops landed on the island of
_Martinico_; but so many difficulties were encountered, that they
were re-embarked, and the attack on this island was abandoned.

From Martinico the fleet proceeded to _Guadeloupe_, and the
forts and batteries on the shore having been silenced by the
ships-of-war, the troops landed on the 24th of January, and took
possession of the town and citadel of Basse-Terre; the French
soldiers and inhabitants, with their armed negroes, retired to the
mountains, and prepared for a desperate defence of the interior of
the island.

For three months hostilities were continued on the island, and
during this period the officers and soldiers of the SIXTY-FIRST
evinced valour and perseverance in carrying operations against,
and making attacks on, the posts occupied by the enemy. Captain
William Gunning, of the regiment, was killed at the attack of
a hill near _Fort Louis_; “he was an excellent officer, and
universally lamented by the army[1].” Lieut.-Colonel Barlow
distinguished himself at the head of a detachment at the capture
of _St. Maries_, when a party of the SIXTY-FIRST penetrated a
thick wood, and gained the rear of a strong post, from which the
French were soon driven. The regiment also made a very determined
effort to penetrate the woody mountains, and turn the enemy’s main
position, and the operations of the day were successful. After much
desultory fighting, the French were forced to surrender the island.
The SIXTY-FIRST had a number of men killed and wounded; and others
died from the effects of the climate: the loss of the regiment in
officers was Capt.-Lieutenant William Gunning killed; Lieutenant
John Rowland wounded; Ensign Samuel Horner died. The conduct of the
officers and soldiers of the SIXTY-FIRST was commended in orders.

On the decease of Major-General Elliott, he was succeeded in the
colonelcy of the regiment by Lieut.-Colonel George Gray, from the
first troop, now first regiment, of Life Guards.

[Sidenote: 1760]

[Sidenote: 1763]

The regiment, having become considerably reduced in numbers,
returned to England to recruit, and in the summer of 1760 it was
encamped at Chatham; in 1761 it proceeded to the islands of Jersey
and Guernsey, where it was stationed until the termination of the
seven years’ war; and in 1763 it proceeded to Ireland, where it
remained seven years.

On the 9th of May, 1768, Major-General Gray was removed to the
Thirty-seventh Regiment; and King George III. conferred the
colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST on Major-General John Gore, from
lieutenant-colonel in the Third Foot Guards.

[Sidenote: 1771]

Three years afterwards the regiment was removed from Ireland, and
stationed at the island of Minorca, which had been captured by
the British in 1708, and was ceded to Queen Anne by the treaty of
Utrecht in 1713.

[Sidenote: 1778]

Lieut.-General Gore was removed to the Sixth Foot in 1773, when the
colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST was conferred on the lieut.-colonel
of the regiment, Colonel John Barlow; who was succeeded, in
1778, by Major-General Staates Long Morriss, whose regiment, the
Eighty-ninth, had been disbanded at the termination of the seven
years’ war.

[Sidenote: 1772]

[Sidenote: 1779]

[Sidenote: 1781]

In the mean time the American war had commenced; France had united
with the revolted British provinces in their resistance; and Spain
also commenced hostilities against Great Britain, and undertook
the siege of Gibraltar in 1779. The capture of _Minorca_ was also
contemplated by the court of Spain; and in the middle of August,
1781, a powerful Spanish and French armament appeared before the
island. The British troops employed on the detached stations were
withdrawn, and the whole assembled in the citadel of St. Philip,
the garrison of which place consisted of the Fifty-first and
SIXTY-FIRST Regiments, two corps of Hanoverians (viz., Prince
Ernest’s and Goldacker’s regiments), and a proportion of artillery,
the whole amounting to two thousand five hundred men, commanded
by Lieut.-General the Hon. James Murray, and Lieut.-General Sir
William Draper, K.B. The combined French and Spanish forces
mustered sixteen thousand men, commanded by Lieutenant-General the
Duke of Crillon, who proved an officer of ability. The British
garrison, however, made a resolute defence of the fortress
intrusted to their charge; and the King of Spain, losing patience
with the slow progress of the siege, caused a large sum of money
to be offered to the British general, to induce him to betray his
trust, which was rejected with indignation[2].

[Sidenote: 1782]

For several months the British soldiers defended St. Philip with
great gallantry; but at length the scurvy, a putrid fever, and the
dysentery, broke out among them with so much violence, that in the
beginning of February, 1782, there was not a sufficient number of
men able to bear arms for one relief of the ordinary guards, and
not one hundred men free from disease. Under these circumstances
the governor capitulated.

Lieut.-General the Honorable James Murray stated, in his
despatch,--“I flatter myself that all Europe will agree that the
brave garrison showed uncommon heroism, and that thirst for glory
which has ever distinguished the troops of my royal master.... Such
was the uncommon spirit of the King’s soldiers, that they concealed
their diseases and inability rather than go into the hospital;
several men died on guard, after having stood sentry: their fate
was not discovered until called upon for the relief, when it came
to their turn to mount sentry again.... Perhaps a more noble, nor
a more tragical scene was ever exhibited than that of the march of
the garrison of St. Philip through the Spanish and French lines.
It consisted of no more than six hundred decrepid soldiers; two
hundred seamen, one hundred and twenty royal artillery, twenty
Corsicans, and twenty-five Greeks, &c. Such was the distressing
appearance of our men, that many of the Spanish and French soldiers
are said to have shed tears.”

In the articles of capitulation the Duke of Crillon stated,--“No
troops ever gave greater proofs of heroism than this poor worn-out
garrison of St. Philip’s Castle, who have defended themselves
almost to the last man.” Beatson, the historian of these wars,
states,--“The zeal, bravery, and constancy, displayed by all the
corps composing the garrison of St. Philip, under an accumulation
of misfortunes, may have been equalled, but never exceeded.”

[Sidenote: 1783]

Returning to England after the surrender of Fort St. Philip,
the regiment was engaged in recruiting its numbers until the
termination of the war; in August, 1782, it received the county
title of the SIXTY-FIRST, or the SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE Regiment:
and in 1783, it proceeded to Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1792]

The regiment was stationed in Ireland until the spring of 1792,
when it proceeded to Gibraltar.

[Sidenote: 1793]

[Sidenote: 1794]

While the regiment was at Gibraltar the French revolutionary war
commenced, and in 1794 the French West India islands of Martinico,
St. Lucia, and Guadeloupe were captured. The French republican
government fitted out an expedition for the recovery of the
conquered islands, and some success attended their efforts. This
occurrence occasioned an order to be received for the SIXTY-FIRST
Regiment to be embarked from Gibraltar to reinforce the British
troops in the West Indies, where it arrived in December, and landed
at the island of Martinico.

[Sidenote: 1795]

From Martinico the regiment proceeded to _St. Lucia_, and was
engaged in the attack of the French troops on that island in April,
1795, under the orders of Brigadier-General Stewart. Some severe
fighting took place; the regiment had several men wounded on the
14th of April; and on 22nd of that month it had nine men killed;
Captains Riddle and Whelan, Lieutenants Grant and Moore, Ensign
Butler, seven serjeants, two drummers, and fifty-three rank and
file wounded; five rank and file prisoners. A series of actions
followed, in which considerable loss was sustained. The enemy being
reinforced, obtained so great a superiority of numbers, that it was
found necessary to evacuate the island in June, when the regiment
returned to Martinico.

[Sidenote: 1796]

In the following year an armament, under Lieut.-General Sir
Ralph Abercromby re-captured St. Lucia and other islands. The
SIXTY-FIRST Regiment having lost nearly four hundred men by
disease, killed in action, died of wounds, &c., it embarked for
England, where it arrived in October, and commenced recruiting its
ranks.

[Sidenote: 1797]

The regiment embarked for Guernsey in 1797.

[Sidenote: 1798]

[Sidenote: 1799]

Holland had, in the mean time, become united to France, and in
1795 the Cape of Good Hope was captured by a British armament.
A rebellion breaking out on the frontiers of the colony, the
SIXTY-FIRST embarked for the Cape of Good Hope in the summer of
1798; the regiment arrived at that settlement in January, 1799, and
was stationed there upwards of two years.

During its stay at the Cape of Good Hope, the regiment was
employed against the hardy and warlike tribes of _Kafirs_, who
committed depredations in the colony. On one occasion the light
infantry company marched upwards of forty miles in one day, to
support a detachment of the Eighth Light Dragoons, in an attack
upon the Kafirs, and the timely appearance of the soldiers of the
SIXTY-FIRST contributed to the success gained on that occasion.

[Sidenote: 1800]

The SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, with a detachment of the Eighty-first,
built a block-house, and threw up works at Algoa Bay, and thus
commenced the formation of a settlement at that place, which has
since risen into importance.

On the decease of General Morriss, King George III. conferred the
colonelcy of the regiment on Major-General George Hewitt, from
Colonel-Commandant of the second battalion of the Fifth Regiment,
by commission dated the 4th of April, 1800.

[Sidenote: 1801]

In February, 1801, four companies of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment
embarked from the Cape of Good Hope, for a secret service; but they
were afterwards directed to join the Indian army commanded by
Major-General Baird, destined to proceed up the Red Sea, traverse
the Desert, and co-operate, with the troops from Europe, in the
expulsion of the French “_Army of the East_” from Egypt. The
remaining six companies of the regiment sailed from the Cape of
Good Hope on the 30th of March, under the orders of Lieut.-Colonel
Carruthers, to join the expedition in the Red Sea.

The army from India arrived at the port of Cosseir on the Red Sea
in June, and marched through the Desert to Kenna on the Nile,
by divisions. The four companies of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, a
detachment of the Tenth Foot, and a party of the Eighth Light
Dragoons, mustering five hundred and eighty-two soldiers, under
Lieut.-Colonel Barlow, of the SIXTY-FIRST[3], commenced their march
from Cosseir through the Desert on the 18th of July; they suffered
much from excessive heat, thirst, and the fatigue of a long march
through a sandy desert, and arrived at Kenna in ten days. The other
companies landed at Cosseir on the 10th of July, and commenced
their march on the 20th of that month for Kenna, where they arrived
in nine days, with the loss of only one man, a drummer, who died of
fatigue. When the company, to which the drummer belonged, arrived
at camp, he was missed, and Private Andrew Connell asked permission
to return, notwithstanding the previous fatigue he had undergone,
and assist the drummer: his humane exertions were, however,
unavailing, as he found the drummer dead. This humane conduct
brought Andrew Connell into notice, and he was eventually promoted
to a commission in the regiment.

On the 2nd of August the regiment embarked in seventeen d’jirms
(boats), and proceeded down the river Nile, about four hundred
miles, to Cairo, which city had surrendered to the British troops a
short time previously. The regiment afterwards continued its route
down the Nile to the vicinity of Rosetta. The siege of Alexandria
was carried on with vigour, and the deliverance of Egypt was
completed by the surrender of the French garrison in the beginning
of September.

The SIXTY-FIRST received, in common with the other corps which
served on this expedition, the honor of bearing on their colours
the word “EGYPT” with the Sphinx, as a distinguished mark of His
Majesty’s royal approbation of their conduct: the officers were
permitted to accept of gold medals from the Grand Seignior.

After the departure of the French troops, the regiment was
quartered a short time at Alexandria, and afterwards in Fort
Charles.

[Sidenote: 1802]

The deliverance of Egypt was followed by a treaty of peace, which
was concluded in the spring of 1802. In this year the regiment
quitted Fort Charles, and encamped near Alexandria.

[Sidenote: 1803]

Hostilities were resumed with France in 1803; and in March of the
same year the regiment embarked from Egypt for the island of Malta,
where it was stationed two years.

Napoleon Bonaparte having assembled a numerous army at Boulogne,
and made preparations for the invasion of England, the British
military establishment was considerably augmented, and a _second
battalion_ was formed and added to the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment;
it was composed of men raised in the counties of Durham and
Northumberland, under the provisions of the Army of Reserve Act,
passed in the summer of 1803, and was placed on the establishment
of the army on the 9th of July.

[Sidenote: 1804]

The strength of the second battalion was augmented in 1804, with
the men raised in the county of Northumberland under the provisions
of the Additional Force Act, passed in July of that year. On the
10th of October the battalion embarked from Ramsgate for the Island
of Guernsey, where it was stationed during the following year.

[Sidenote: 1805]

While the first battalion was at Malta, Bonaparte was elevated to
the dignity of Emperor of France and King of Italy, and in 1805 he
marched his armies into Germany to crush the combination forming
against his interests.

At this memorable period the regiment embarked from Malta, and
sailed for Italy with the force under Lieut.-General Sir James
Craig, designed to support the interests of the allies in that
quarter.

A treaty of neutrality had been concluded between France and
Naples, by which Napoleon agreed to withdraw his troops from the
Neapolitan territory, where they had been stationed since the
commencement of the war with England; and the King of Naples was
bound not to admit the fleet or armies of any state at war with
France into his ports or territory. These articles were, however,
violated; an English and Russian armament appeared in the Bay of
Naples in November, 1805, and the SIXTY-FIRST, and several other
British regiments, landed at that city. This provoked the wrath
of Napoleon; and the great success of the French arms in Germany
having enabled their ambitious sovereign to assume the tone of
a dictator, on the morning after the signature of the peace of
Presburg, he issued a proclamation declaring, “The Neapolitan
dynasty had ceased to reign,” and denouncing vengeance against the
family he had thus resolved to dethrone, in terms which left no
hope of accommodation.

[Sidenote: 1806]

The Russians withdrew from Naples; and the British, under
Lieut.-General Sir James Craig, were too few in numbers to think of
defending the kingdom against the powerful armies which Napoleon
sent against that devoted country, in the early part of 1806, under
Joseph Bonaparte.

The SIXTY-FIRST embarked from Naples in January, 1806; the King
and Queen quitted their capital, and proceeded to the island of
Sicily, which was preserved in their interest by the British; the
SIXTY-FIRST were landed at the city of Messina, on the north-east
side of Sicily, and were stationed there several weeks. The
Neapolitans abandoned their royal family to its fate, and submitted
to the dictates of Napoleon, who issued a decree conferring the
crown of Naples on his brother Joseph: the city of Naples was
illuminated, and the nobles were eager to shew their attachment to
their new King. Insurrections occurred in several places; but the
French arms were successful, and the provinces became tranquil.

On the 26th of February the second battalion embarked from Guernsey
for Ireland, and landed at Cork in March.

It was important to England that Sicily should not fall under the
dominion of France, and the restoration of Ferdinand IV. to the
throne of Naples, was never lost sight of. Preparations being made
on the opposite coast of Calabria, for the invasion of Sicily,
Major-General Stuart, commanding the British troops in Sicily,
formed the design of cutting off the French division under General
Regnier: the flank companies of the SIXTY-FIRST[4] were formed
in flank battalions, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel James Kempt
and Lieut.-Colonel R. W. O’Callaghan, and being employed on this
enterprise, they had the honor of distinguishing themselves at the
battle of _Maida_, on the 4th of July.

On this occasion the light battalion, commanded by Lieut.-Colonel
James Kempt, of which the light company of the SIXTY-FIRST formed
part, was directly opposed to the celebrated French regiment, _Le
1^{er} Leger_; the two corps fired a few rounds at about a hundred
yards’ distance, and then advancing simultaneously to the charge,
both preserved great steadiness until the bayonets began to cross,
when British prowess proved victorious; the French faced about and
fled; they were pursued, and great slaughter made with the bayonet.
British valour was triumphant at every part of the field, and the
boasted invincible legions of Napoleon were proved to be inferior
to the English in close combat with the bayonet.

The British minister at Palermo, writing to the Secretary of State,
observed,--“The battle of Maida, upon the 4th of July, will long
be remembered in this part of Europe, as a remarkable proof of the
superiority of British courage and discipline over an arrogant
and cruel enemy. Of the nine thousand men whom General Regnier
commanded in the province of Calabria ulterior, not more than
three thousand are left to attempt their retreat towards Apulia;
the remainder are all either killed, wounded, or made prisoners.
Every fort along the coast,--all the stores, ammunition, and
artillery prepared for the attack upon Sicily, are become the prey
of the victors; and what, perhaps, may be considered of still more
consequence than these advantages, an indelible impression is made
in this country of the superior bravery and discipline of the
British troops.”

In forwarding a vote of thanks to Major-General Stuart, and
the troops under his orders, from the House of Lords, the Lord
Chancellor stated,--“Reflecting upon the disasters which have
fallen upon powerful princes, and populous territories, under the
pressure of the vast armies of France, I recollect, at the same
time, that they were not defended by British soldiers, and that,
when the triumphal monuments of Paris shall record the victories
of Austerlitz and Jena, it shall appear upon the less ostentatious
journals of a British Parliament, that upon the plains of Maida her
choicest battalions fell beneath the bayonets of half the number of
our brave countrymen, under your direction and that of the officers
who were your glorious companions.”

Major-General Stuart was rewarded with the dignity of a Knight of
the Bath; and was created Count of Maida by the King of the Two
Sicilies. Medals were given to commanding officers,--the first
instance in the British army. The word “MAIDA,” on the appointments
of the grenadiers and light infantry of the SIXTY-FIRST,
commemorates the gallant conduct of the flank companies on this
occasion.

Shortly after the victory at Maida, the battalion companies of the
SIXTY-FIRST quitted Messina, and proceeded to Scylla and Calabria.

[Sidenote: 1807]

The second battalion, after remaining in Ireland ten months,
received orders to return to England; it embarked from Dublin
on the 4th of February, 1807, and landed at Liverpool two days
afterwards.

[Sidenote: 1808]

At this period the decrees of Napoleon, Emperor of France, for
the annihilation of British commerce, were in operation, and the
French emperor demanded that the court of Portugal should exclude
British shipping from their ports, and confiscate the property
of British merchants. This being refused, a French army under
Marshal Junot, (afterwards Duke of Abrantes,) advanced to invade
Portugal: when the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment embarked from Sicily, with
the troops under Major-General Moore, to aid the Portuguese; but
arriving at Gibraltar in December, it was there ascertained that
the royal family of Portugal had abandoned the country, and fled
to the Brazils: under these circumstances the regiment landed
at Gibraltar, where it remained during the year 1808, receiving
reinforcements from time to time from the second battalion, which
was removed to Guernsey in the summer of this year.

While the regiment was at Gibraltar, Portugal was delivered from
the power of France by British skill and valour; but Spain was
subject to the oppression of Napoleon, who had removed his brother
Joseph from the throne of Naples, and caused him to be proclaimed
King of Spain.

[Sidenote: 1809]

In the summer of 1809, the regiment was ordered to proceed to
Portugal, to take part in the attempt to deliver the Peninsula;
it embarked from Gibraltar on the 9th of June, arrived at Lisbon
in eleven days, and advancing up the country, joined the army
commanded by Lieut.-General Sir Arthur Wellesley, at Oropesa, where
it was attached to Brigadier-General Cameron’s brigade, in the
first division, commanded by Major-General Sherbrooke.

The regiment shared in the movements and privations which preceded
the battle of _Talavera_; and when the army formed in position,
it was posted, with its division, in the front line, and near the
centre of the British troops, with the light infantry among the
underwood and trees in front of the line. On the evening of the
27th of July, the enemy made a determined attack on the height
on the left of the position, when the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment was
moved to the support of the troops attacked, who repulsed their
opponents with the bayonet, and the regiment returned to its former
post, having lost three men killed; Major Robert John Coghlan, and
three soldiers wounded. Another attack on the left was repulsed
early on the following morning.

About mid-day on the 28th of July, the numerous artillery of the
enemy opened a heavy fire, under the cover of which the columns
of attack advanced against the British line. The French bullets
smote the ranks of the SIXTY-FIRST with fatal effect, and one
shell killed four grenadiers and wounded three others. The French
battalions cleared the ravine, and ascended the position in full
assurance of victory; but they were received with a general fire
of all arms, and charged with bayonets with so much vigour, that
they were speedily forced back: the SIXTY-FIRST closed on their
adversaries with distinguished gallantry, and following up their
first advantage, drove the French beyond the ravine. Having become
broken by a rapid advance over rugged ground abounding with
obstructions, the regiment re-formed its ranks under a heavy fire.
The distinguished conduct of Corporal Rose, on this occasion, was
rewarded with the rank of serjeant in the field, and a subsequent
display of zeal for the service, procured him a commission.

The French were repulsed at all points, and they retired during the
night.

Major Henry Francis Orpen, Captain Henry James, Lieutenant Daniel
James Hemus, one drummer, and forty-two rank and file were killed;
Captains Andrew Hartley, William Furnace, James Laing, and David
Goodman, Lieutenants Graves Collins, H. T. Tench, George McLean,
and James Given, Ensign William Brackenbury, Adjutant Richard Drew,
ten serjeants, and one hundred and eighty-three rank and file
wounded; sixteen rank and file missing.

Lieutenant-Colonel Saunders and Major Coghlan received gold medals;
and the royal authority was given for the regiment to bear the word
“TALAVERA” on its colours, to commemorate its distinguished conduct
on this occasion.

At the battle of Talavera full proof was given of the qualities
of British soldiers; but the superior numbers which the enemy
was afterwards enabled to bring forward, prevented the victory
being followed by decisive results, and retrograde movements
became necessary. On the advance of the enemy, the Spaniards
abandoned Talavera, and the wounded officers and soldiers of the
SIXTY-FIRST fell into the hands of the French. During the retreat
much suffering was endured from the want of provision, and while
the army was in position on the Guadiana, a fever broke out which
thinned the ranks. In the autumn the SIXTY-FIRST were gratified,
amidst their sufferings and losses, by the arrival of Major Coghlan
and Adjutant Drew, who had escaped from prison at Madrid.

[Sidenote: 1810]

Three hundred men joined from the second battalion in February,
1810, and thus restored the regiment to its former numbers. In
April the second battalion proceeded from Guernsey to Ireland.

Continuing with the first division of the allied army, the regiment
proceeded to the northern frontiers of Portugal to meet the French
invading army, under Marshal Massena, who boasted that he would
drive the English into the sea, and plant the eagles of France
on the towers of Lisbon; and he possessed so great a superiority
of numbers, that the allied army was forced to retreat before
him. Suddenly the rugged rocks of _Busaco_ were seen sparkling
with British bayonets, assembled to oppose his advance, and the
desperate attempts made by the French veterans to force the
position, on the 27th of September, were met by a resistance
which they could not overcome. The SIXTY-FIRST were in position on
this occasion, and the light company skirmished with the French
marksmen; but the regiment was not seriously engaged.

The French having turned the position by a flank movement, the
British army withdrew to the fortified lines of _Torres Vedras_,
where the invading army found its progress arrested by a barrier
which it did not venture to attack, and after halting a few weeks
before the lines in hopeless inactivity, retreated to a strong
position at Santarem.

On arriving at the lines, the SIXTY-FIRST were removed to the
fourth division, and stationed at the village of Caxaria, and it
was in position every morning two hours before daylight to resist
any attack the enemy might be disposed to make. The regiment was
subsequently removed to the sixth division, with which its services
are identified during the remainder of the war; it was united in
brigade with the Eleventh and Fifty-third Regiments, commanded by
Brigadier-General Hulse.

After the retreat of the French to Santarem, the regiment was
stationed at the Convent of Alenquer, where several officers and
men were taken suddenly ill, and the only remaining monk suggested,
that it was probably occasioned by the water,--the French having,
on their retreat, cast several dead men into the well in the centre
of the square, to save the trouble of burying them: on examination
this proved to be true,--and the sensations produced by the
discovery may be easily conceived. In a few days afterwards the
regiment was removed to the hamlet of Arunda.

[Sidenote: 1811]

Unable to fulfil his menace of driving the English into the sea,
and having consumed all the provisions he could procure, the
French Marshal retreated from his position at Santarem, on the 5th
of March, 1811, and the SIXTY-FIRST were engaged in following
the retreat of the enemy to the frontiers of Portugal: they were
afterwards employed, with their division, in the blockade of the
fortress of _Almeida_, and were quartered at the village of Junca,
from whence they furnished a daily piquet near the works.

The French army advancing to relieve Almeida, the SIXTY-FIRST
quitted the blockade, and were in position when the French were
repulsed at _Fuentes d’Onor_; but did not sustain any loss.

Resuming its quarters at Junca, the regiment again furnished
piquets before Almeida. An unusual noise during the night of the
11th of May occasioned the regiment to assemble at its alarm post,
and march towards Almeida; the grenadier company advanced to the
walls, and Captain Furnace discovered a chasm in the works, at
which he entered and ascertained that the French garrison had blown
up a great part of the works, and evacuated the fortress; when
Major Coghlan ordered a guard of one hundred men to take possession
of the town, which was found much injured by the explosions.

Lord Wellington having undertaken the siege of Badajoz, Marshals
Soult and Marmont marched the armies under their orders to the
relief of that fortress, when the SIXTY-FIRST proceeded with their
division to the Alemtejo, and were in position on the Caya. The
French armies having separated, the regiment again traversed the
country towards the Agueda; and in September the light company,
under Captain Owen, distinguished itself by repulsing, by its
steady fire, the attack of several squadrons of French dragoons,
who had driven back a body of British cavalry near Ciudad Rodrigo,
when Marshal Marmont relieved the blockade of that fortress.

After retiring a few miles before the superior numbers of the
enemy, the regiment went into winter quarters, where it received a
draft of two hundred men from the second battalion.

Colonel Saunders being promoted to the rank of major-general,
Lieut.-Colonel Barlow arrived in Portugal to command the first
battalion, and Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan proceeded to Ireland to
command the second battalion. Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan had commanded
the first battalion during two campaigns.

[Sidenote: 1812]

In January, 1812, the regiment was employed in covering the siege
of _Ciudad Rodrigo_, which fortress was captured by assault during
the night of the 19th of that month. The regiment afterwards
traversed the country to the Alemtejo, from whence it advanced
across the Guadiana, and was employed in Spanish Estremadura during
the siege of Badajoz, which fortress was captured by assault on the
6th of April. After these brilliant enterprises were completed,
the regiment returned to the northern frontiers of Portugal, and
marched to sustain the troops which destroyed the French works at
the bridge of Almarez.

Advancing into Spain, the allied army drove a French corps from
the city of _Salamanca_, which was taken possession of amidst
the rejoicings of the inhabitants, and the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment
was one of the corps employed in the siege of the forts of San
Vincente, St. Cajetano, and La Merced, in which the French had
left garrisons. On the night of the 22nd of June the light company
was engaged in an attempt to capture St. Cajetano and La Merced by
escalade, when Captain JOHN OWEN led the assault with distinguished
gallantry; he had gained the top of one of the ladders, and was in
the act of entering the fort, when he was shot through the left
arm, which was dreadfully shattered, and the next moment another
shot in the shoulder precipitated him into the ditch. Private
_Charles Carr_ saw his Captain fall, and leaping into the ditch
under a heavy fire raised the fallen Captain,--called a comrade to
his aid, and they carried their officer to a place of safety. The
attack failed. Captain Owen was promoted to the rank of major, and
on receiving the usual pension for the loss of his arm, he settled
an annuity upon Private Charles Carr.

The regiment sustained considerable loss on this occasion in killed
and wounded, and among the latter was Lieutenant Given.

Some delay took place in the capture of the convents, from the want
of ammunition; but a supply having been received, they were reduced
before the end of June.

From Salamanca the regiment advanced to the banks of the Douro, and
when the French army passed the river and advanced, the British
fell back a few stages.

On the 22nd of July, the opposing armies manœuvred near
_Salamanca_, and the French commander making a faulty movement,
the British general ordered his divisions forward and commenced
the battle. For some time the SIXTY-FIRST were formed, with
their division, behind the village of Arapiles, to support the
fourth division, which was engaged upon a rising ground beyond
the village; the regiment was exposed to a heavy cannonade; and
the village was soon in flames from the bursting of shells. The
fourth division being pressed by very superior numbers, the sixth
division advanced at a running pace to its support, and on passing
the village of Arapiles the SIXTY-FIRST opened their fire; but
the French soldiers were so mingled with the men of the fourth
division, that the regiment ceased firing for fear of destroying
friends as well as enemies. The French carried the hill, and,
elated with success, rushed forward with great impetuosity; but
the Eleventh and SIXTY-FIRST gave three cheers, fired a volley, and
charged with bayonets with so much resolution that the torrent of
battle was arrested, and, after a desperate effort, the French were
overpowered, and the hill was re-captured. Lieut.-Colonel Barlow,
Major Downing, eight other officers, and about a hundred soldiers
had fallen; but the survivors pressed upon their opponents with
the bayonet until ordered to halt on the low ground beyond the
hill. The French rallied under a cloud of skirmishers, and appeared
intent on attempting to recover the hill. At this moment the
regiment was exposed to the fire of a number of sharpshooters, and
a numerous artillery, it was threatened with a charge of infantry,
and a hostile body of cavalry was manœuvring on its left, yet it
was as steady as on an ordinary parade; the surviving officers and
soldiers formed four divisions two deep, and prepared to charge
with their gallant associates of the Eleventh Regiment. Colonel
Napier states, in his _History of the Peninsular War_,--“The
struggle was no slight one. The men of General Hulse’s brigade,
which was on the left, went down by hundreds, and the SIXTY-FIRST
and Eleventh Regiments won their way desperately, and through such
a fire as British soldiers only can sustain.” The southern ridge
was regained, and “the reserve of Boyer’s dragoons coming on at a
canter, were met and broken by the fire of Hulse’s noble brigade.
Then the changing current of the fight once more set for the
British.” In this second advance the Eleventh and SIXTY-FIRST drove
the enemy before them a considerable distance. The two regiments
then halted, and being within range of the enemy’s artillery,
Major-General Hulse directed the men to sit down; but the French
fire occasioned many casualties, and the major-general called the
commanding officers of regiments forward and directed them to
acquaint their men with his intention of attacking the heights
in front. This was answered by three cheers from the surviving
officers and men, and an immediate advance, under a destructive
fire from the French artillery and skirmishers; but the brigade
pressed gallantly forward and speedily gained the summit. The
French formed column. The Eleventh and SIXTY-FIRST changed front,
and opening their fire, soon forced the enemy to retire. The
officers and serjeants with the colours of the SIXTY-FIRST fell
under the enemy’s fire, when the colours were seized by Privates
_William Crawford_ and _Nicholas Coulson_, who carried them to
the top of the hill. Crawford was instantly promoted to serjeant;
the same rank was offered to Coulson, but he answered that he was
over-rewarded already by the cheers and thanks of his comrades, and
the approbation of his officers. Serjeant Crawford fell a sacrifice
to his gallantry in a subsequent engagement.

Lieutenants Wolfe and Armstrong took charge of the colours, and
the regiment continued to advance. The sixth division was engaged
towards the close of the action, in forcing the French from the
last height on which they ventured to make a stand: and when
darkness put an end to the fight, the British were victorious at
every part of the field; at the same time the broken remains of the
French army were hurrying from the scene of disaster in confusion.

The loss of the SIXTY-FIRST on this occasion was very
severe,--Lieut.-Colonel Barlow, Captains Stubbs, Horton, and
Favell, Lieutenants Chawner and Parker, Ensign Bere, three
serjeants, one drummer, and thirty-five rank and file, killed;
Major Downing, Captains Oke, McLeod, and Greene, Lieutenants
Falkner, Daniel, Chapman, Chipchase, Furnace, Gloster, Collis,
Wolfe, Brackenbury, Royal, and Toole, Ensigns White and Singleton,
twenty-two serjeants, one drummer, and two hundred and eighty rank
and file, wounded. Major Downing died of his wounds[5].

Captain Annesley, who commanded the regiment at the close of
the action, received a gold medal; and the word “SALAMANCA” was
inscribed on the colours, by royal authority, to commemorate its
distinguished gallantry on this memorable occasion.

Shortly after the battle of Salamanca the command of a brigade in
the fifth division was conferred on Major-General Hulse, who took
leave of the brigade he had previously commanded in the following
orders:--“His Excellency the Commander of the Forces having been
pleased to remove Major-General Hulse to the command of a brigade
in the fifth division, the major-general cannot leave the officers
and soldiers of the brigade he had the honor and happiness to
command for nearly two years, without assuring them how fully
satisfied he has ever been with their excellent conduct, both in
quarters and in the field, during that period. The major-general
wishes, most pointedly, to express how much he feels indebted to
them for their steadiness and determined courage displayed in the
action of the 22nd instant. It will ever be to him a source of
the greatest pride to have had the honor to command them on that
glorious day. Never did British troops acquit themselves in a more
gallant style! and Major-General Hulse hopes all will accept his
best thanks for their exemplary conduct, and his warmest wishes for
their future welfare.”

After pursuing the broken remains of the French army to Valladolid,
the British General marched to Madrid, leaving the SIXTY-FIRST,
and a few other corps, at the town of Cuellar, situate on the
declivity of a hill in the province of Segovia. The French army
being reinforced, advanced down the Pisuerga valley, when the
British infantry removed to Arevalo, and the French took possession
of Valladolid. Lord Wellington returning from Madrid, the French
again retreated, and the British advanced up the beautiful Pisuerga
and Arlanzan valley to _Burgos_, and commenced the siege of the
castle, in which service the SIXTY-FIRST were engaged; many of the
officers and soldiers having recovered of their wounds, were again
at the post of honor, and the regiment mustered about two hundred
men, under Captains Sparrow, Greene, and Annesley, Lieutenants
McLean, Furnace, Wolfe, Armstrong, and Harris. Lieutenant Stuart
was attached to the engineer department, and was severely wounded.

For a short time the regiment was encamped about a mile from the
fortress, but afterwards removed to the Hopital del Rey. Captain
Annesley and a party of the regiment distinguished themselves at
the storming of the outworks on the 4th of October, for which they
were thanked in orders by Colonel Bingham, the field officer on
duty in the trenches at the time. The distinguished gallantry of
Private Edmonstone, on this occasion, was rewarded with the rank of
serjeant.

On one occasion, the post occupied by a small piquet, under
Lieutenant Armstrong, was destroyed by a mine, which killed and
wounded two-thirds of the piquet; the enemy at the same time
making a sortie. The lieutenant was thrown some distance by the
explosion, but was not seriously injured; and he took possession,
with the surviving men, of some houses, and by a steady fire forced
the French to retire within their works;--Lieutenant Armstrong
humorously observing, “My cloak is on the post, and the French
shall not even possess that as a trophy.” On another occasion,
Lieutenant Harris and a party of the regiment evinced great
intrepidity on the glacis.

The concentration of the enemy’s numerous forces rendered it
necessary for the British to raise the siege of Burgos Castle and
retire, and the SIXTY-FIRST shared in the fatigues and privations
of this retrograde movement. On one occasion the light company,
under Lieutenant Wolfe, was employed in retarding the passage of a
river by the enemy; and the regiment also aided in the destruction
of one of the bridges across the Douro. The regiment arrived
at the frontiers of Portugal, without losing more than one man
during the retreat. It proceeded into quarters under the orders of
Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan; and was joined by a strong detachment from
the second battalion during the winter.

[Sidenote: 1813]

The progress of military organization in Portugal and Spain, with
the arrival of reinforcements from England, enabled the British
commander to take the field in May, 1813, with a formidable army.
He drove the French from Salamanca, turned their positions on the
Douro, and forced them back in disorder upon Burgos, when they
destroyed the castle and retreated to the Ebro, the passage of
which river they were prepared to defend; but he turned their
position by a flank march, and obliged them to fall back upon
Vittoria, where they formed for battle. The sixth division was left
behind at Medina de Pomar, to cover the march of the magazines,
and the SIXTY-FIRST were thus prevented sharing in the victory at
Vittoria on the 21st of June. They were sufficiently near to hear
the firing, and arrived at the field of battle on the following
day, to take charge of the captured artillery and stores.

The regiment was subsequently employed in attempting to intercept
the French division under General Clausel, and when this force
had escaped to France, the regiment proceeded to Pampeluna, to
take part in the blockade of that fortress, from which duty it was
relieved by a Spanish corps, on the 14th of July, and advanced into
the Pyrenean Mountains to San Estevan, situated in a beautiful
valley, where it halted. Thus, after marching nearly six hundred
miles in seven weeks, passing six great rivers, gaining one
decisive battle, and investing the two fortresses of Pampeluna
and San Sebastian, the allied army stood triumphant on the lofty
Pyrenees, and the officers and soldiers panted for opportunities to
acquire additional honors.

The French army having been reinforced, and reorganized,
advanced under Marshal Soult, and attacked the British posts in
the mountains, when the allied army fell back to a position in
front of Pampeluna. The sixth division, to which the SIXTY-FIRST
continued to belong, quitted San Estevan to support the troops
first attacked; but when advancing, Lord Wellington rode up to
the division, and ordered it to halt for the night. It afterwards
retired through the mountain passes, and bivouacked, during the
night of the 27th of July, in a pine-wood. At daybreak on the
following morning it resumed its march, and joining the army in
position in the mountains, formed for battle across the valley
in the rear of the left of the fourth division, its right on the
village of Oricain, and its left on some heights.

Soon after the regiment had taken its post, columns of attack
were seen in motion to commence the battle of the _Pyrenees_,
where the SIXTY-FIRST had another opportunity of distinguishing
themselves. A body of French troops moved along the valley of Lanz
towards the mountain at its extremity, and the SIXTY-FIRST, with
two other British corps, were ordered to move at a running pace
and occupy the mountain. The SIXTY-FIRST hastened up the hill on
one side, as the French skirmishers ascended on the other; but
the British gained the summit first, and opened their fire with
terrible effect. The French were encompassed in the valley; two
brigades smote them from the left, the Portuguese smote them from
the right, and the sixth division forced them back with a terrible
carnage. The enemy retreated behind the village of Sauroren. The
SIXTY-FIRST, and two other regiments, advanced to a post near the
village, and the fire of small-arms was kept up until dark.

No serious fighting occurred on the 29th of July; but on the
morning of the 30th the British batteries opened from the heights,
and a cloud of skirmishers advanced against Sauroren. The firing
at this point afterwards subsided; but was eventually renewed,
and the SIXTY-FIRST had the honor to participate in storming the
village and heights of Sauroren, and in forcing the French from a
position, which, from its natural strength and advantages, appeared
almost impregnable. The pursuit was continued until night, and many
prisoners were taken.

The regiment had seventy men killed and wounded; Captains Charleton
and McLean, Lieutenants Wolfe and O’Kearney, and Volunteer Leebody,
were wounded.

Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan received a gold medal; and the word
“PYRENEES” was placed upon the colours of the regiment, as a mark
of royal approbation of its gallant conduct.

Continuing the pursuit of the enemy to the extremity of the
Pyrenees, the regiment ascended the summit of one of the highest
mountains on the 2nd of August, and as the soldiers beheld the
beautiful plains of France, which Napoleon had often declared to
be inviolable, spread in rich landscape scenery before them, they
experienced emotions of exultation in the anticipation of future
conquests. In the afternoon the regiment encamped on a piece of
high ground, surrounded by inaccessible rock, the only entrance to
which was through a chasm; a beautiful stream ran along the hollow
below, with a cannon foundry on its banks. Two days afterwards it
marched to the vale of Los Alduides: and afterwards penetrated
France some distance; but withdrew towards Maya, and relieved the
second division on the heights commanding the pass of Maya, where
the soldiers threw up breastworks. The prospect from these heights
was particularly interesting: on the left was seen the sea, and
the fortress of Bayonne; on the right the thickly wooded plains
of Gascony, interspersed with towns and villages; in front was
the French army; and in the rear of the right and left, the lofty
Pyrenees crowned with the tents of the British army.

On the 1st of September the division drove the enemy from two
heights in its front; and on the 9th of October, it again attacked
the French, to favour the operations of the British troops which
had passed the Bidassoa. Three companies of the SIXTY-FIRST were
engaged on this occasion.

Invigorated by the mountain air, and impatient to win the fair
plains of France before them, the soldiers received with joyful
anticipations the orders to advance, and attack the enemy’s
positions on the _Nivelle_. The SIXTY-FIRST descended from the
mountains by moonlight on the night of the 9th of November, and lay
concealed near the enemy’s piquets until the following morning.
The day broke with great splendour, and as the first rays of
light gilded the summits of the mountains, three guns gave the
signal for the attack, and the French beheld with astonishment the
allied army rise from its concealment, and rush to battle with an
impetuosity they were not prepared to withstand. The SIXTY-FIRST
passed the Nivelle river, and marched through a rugged country
towards the bridge of Amotz, to attack the works at that place;
the skirmishers of the regiment were in front under Lieutenant
Harris. Advancing up a difficult ascent, covered with bushes,
under a sharp fire, the regiment drove a body of French troops
from a semicircular breastwork; several officers of the regiment
outran the men, who had knapsacks to carry, and first jumped into
the works:--Captain William Henry Furnace, who had repeatedly
distinguished himself, fell a sacrifice to his gallantry; and
Lieutenant Christopher Kellet was killed about the same time. The
regiment pressed resolutely forward to storm a redoubt at the top
of the hill; its commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Coghlan,
received a shot through the cap, which grazed the top of his
head,--several officers and men fell, but the regiment continued
its rapid advance, and Lieutenant Harris jumped across the ditch
of the redoubt, when the French fled in dismay, and many of them
were intercepted in the rear of the redoubt. Lieutenant-General
Sir Rowland Hill came up to the regiment, and thanked the officers
and soldiers repeatedly for the very gallant manner in which they
had ascended under the enemy’s fire. A second redoubt was captured
at this part of the enemy’s line, and afterwards a third. The
SIXTY-FIRST penetrated the enemy’s camp, which had been abandoned
and set on fire. The light company of the regiment was detached
on this occasion, and distinguished itself. A decisive victory
was gained, and the British army established itself in the French
territory. Captains James Horton, Marcus Annesley, and Hugh Eccles,
Lieutenants Robert Belton, and Archer Toole, were all severely
wounded.

Lieutenant-Colonel Coghlan received an honorary distinction; Major
Oke was promoted to the rank of lieut.-colonel; and the gallantry
displayed by the regiment on this occasion, was rewarded with the
word “NIVELLE” on its colours.

After this success, the regiment occupied quarters at Ustaritz,
which was found an agreeable change; the bleak summits of the
mountains, on which it had been long stationed, having become
extremely cold. The moral and physical energies of the men were
in full power, and nothing could have withstood their conquering
progress had the weather been favourable.

Early in December a forward movement was ordered; and on the
morning of the 9th of that month a beacon lighted on the heights
above Cambo gave the signal for the attack, when the passage of the
river _Nive_ was forced, and the enemy driven back towards Bayonne.
The sixth division passed the river on floating bridges. The
advanced-guard (in which was the light company of the SIXTY-FIRST,
formed in a light battalion under Captain Greene, of the regiment,)
evinced great gallantry, and surprised the first French piquet,
which fled in dismay. Some sharp fighting occurred; Captain Greene
was wounded, and Captain Charleton was sent from the regiment to
take command of the light battalion. The swampy nature of the
country retarded the advance of the division, and gave time for the
French troops to effect their retreat towards Bayonne. The enemy
advanced and attacked the British troops on the three following
days, but were repulsed.

At the passage of the “NIVE” the regiment earned another honorary
inscription for its colours; and Captain Greene received a medal.
Its loss was limited to Captains Greene and Charleton wounded, and
a few private soldiers killed and wounded.

[Sidenote: 1814]

The regiment was stationed at Ville-Franque from the middle of
November until the 22nd of February, 1814, assisting in the
blockade of _Bayonne_. On one occasion, when the regiment had gone
out for field exercise, leaving the officers, bât-men, pioneers,
and the quartermaster-serjeant in quarters, a heavy fall of rain
so swelled the stream of the Nive, that the pontoon-bridge of
communication was detached from its moorings, and was seen floating
down the stream. Quartermaster-Serjeant Rose (who distinguished
himself at Talavera) and Private Thomas Dawson got hold of the
bridge, and, at the hazard of their lives, succeeded in securing
it, by which much inconvenience to the service was prevented. The
quartermaster-serjeant was rewarded with a commission, and a sum of
money was given to Private Dawson.

Quitting Ville-Franque, the regiment advanced up the country, and
passing the river near Bereux, by a pontoon-bridge, on the morning
of the 27th of February, it afterwards ascended by a narrow way
between high rocks to the great road to Peyrehorade, which brought
it into the presence of the French army, under Marshal Soult, in
position near _Orthes_. The action commenced in the forenoon. The
third and sixth divisions won, without difficulty, the lower part
of the ridges opposed to them, and endeavoured to extend their left
along the French front with a sharp fire of musketry. On the other
flank the French defended their post with more resolution. During
the early part of the day, the skirmishers only of the SIXTY-FIRST
were engaged, and the regiment was in reserve; when the French army
gave way, two fine battalions were seen attempting to cover the
retreat, and Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan led the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment
against them at a running pace. The two battalions fired a volley
and retreated, pursued by the British light cavalry.

Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan received another honorary distinction for
this battle; and the word “ORTHES,” on the colours, commemorates
the gallant bearing of the regiment on this occasion. Its loss was
limited to one serjeant and ten men, killed and wounded.

Pursuing the retreating enemy on the following day, the regiment
took some prisoners, and, being in advance, discovered part of
the French army on an eminence near St. Sever; the enemy again
retreated after dark, and was followed on the succeeding days.
On one occasion the regiment lost a serjeant and seven men in a
skirmish; and Lieutenant Furnace, of the light company, had a
narrow escape, a ball having passed through the collar of his coat.

The regiment again came up with the enemy on the 16th of March,
near Tarbes, and had a few men wounded. The weather was fine, the
soldiers healthy, vigorous, and animated with their uninterrupted
career of success, so that they were ready for any service; but
the French continued their retreat without hazarding a serious
engagement.

Marshal Soult concentrated the French troops under his command in a
fortified position at _Toulouse_; and on the morning of the 10th of
April, the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment was in motion with the fourth and
sixth divisions, under Marshal Beresford, to turn the enemy’s right
flank. The regiment being halted beyond the river Ers, while Lord
Wellington and his staff reconnoitred the enemy, Lieut.-Colonel
Coghlan took that opportunity to address the officers and men in
a short and animated speech, which made a great impression on
their minds. Immediately afterwards the regiment advanced; it
crossed the river Ers, and marched along the left bank exposed
to the enemy’s cannonade. On arriving at its destined point, the
brigade was wheeled into line by Major-General Lambert, who
led it forward to attack a formidable height occupied by French
troops. The enemy descended with loud shouts to meet the advancing
line, and opened a heavy fire of musketry; the SIXTY-FIRST rushed
forward without firing a shot, the officers animating the men by
their example, and answering the French shouts with a loud and
confident huzza! They carried the height with fixed bayonets, but
sustained severe loss. Many of the officers having outrun their
men, who were retarded by the weight of their knapsacks, entered
a French redoubt at the moment the defenders were quitting it,
when a number of French soldiers turned round and fired with fatal
effect: of the SIXTY-FIRST, Lieut.-Colonel Oke, Captain Charleton
(who was calling to the enemy to surrender), and Lieutenant Arden,
were wounded,--the latter mortally. The regiment advanced along
the height until it was ordered to halt under an earthen fence,
which partially sheltered it from the enemy’s guns. Early in the
action its gallant commanding officer, Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan, was
mortally wounded[6]. In the afternoon the regiment, much reduced
in numbers, supported the attack of the Scots brigade on a range
of redoubts, from which the enemy was driven with loss: and the
SIXTY-FIRST were directed to occupy one of the captured redoubts.
The French advanced to recover the redoubts; when Major-General
Lambert directed a division of the SIXTY-FIRST to cross the road,
which was commanded by the enemy’s fire, and reinforce the troops
in another redoubt. This was a perilous movement; but Captain
CHARLETON, whose wound was dressed in the field in time to enable
him to rejoin and command the regiment in its second attack,
placed himself in front of the division, exclaiming, “I will show
the way!” Serjeant _Fraser_ stepped to follow his captain, and,
encouraged by this example, the division made the movement at a
running pace; several officers and soldiers were, however, hit by
the French marksmen. The regiment defended the post committed to
its charge, and the French were driven from their works, and forced
to take refuge in the suburbs of the city of Toulouse. At the
termination of the action, the surviving men of the regiment were
brought out of the field by Adjutant Bace, assisted by two ensigns
and Serjeant Robert Hogg, whose name merits notice from his zealous
exertions during the action.

The SIXTY-FIRST was included, in Lord Wellington’s despatch,
among the corps which had sustained severe loss, and were highly
distinguished throughout the day.

Lieut.-Colonel Coghlan, Lieutenant H. Arden, and Ensign W. A.
Favell, were killed on this occasion; Major J. Oke, Captains W.
Greene and E. Charleton, Lieutenants A. Porteus, N. Furnace[7],
T. Gloster, D. O’Kearney, J. Wolfe, E. Gaynor, W. White[8], J.
Harris, G. Stewart, and J. H. Ellison, Ensigns J. Wright, Cuthbert
Eccles, and S. Bartlett, wounded. The regiment had also eight
serjeants and one hundred and fifty-three rank and file killed and
wounded.

Medals were conferred on Lieut.-Colonel Oke, Captain Charleton (who
was twice wounded), and Adjutant Bace: and the word “TOULOUSE” was
added to the inscriptions on the colours of the regiment.

The French retreated from Toulouse, followed by the British
army, and at St. Felix five officers and seventy men joined the
SIXTY-FIRST, from the second battalion in Ireland, under the orders
of Captain Hamilton.

Hostilities were terminated a few days afterwards; the power
of Bonaparte had been destroyed, and the Bourbon dynasty was
restored to France. The gallant veterans of the SIXTY-FIRST were
thus gratified with a complete triumph over the enemies of their
country. They had traversed kingdoms, fought battles, and conquered
powerful armies for the good of Europe; their valour had exalted
the glory of the British arms, and preserved their native country
from the presence of war: and the word “PENINSULA” was added to the
numerous inscriptions on their colours, to commemorate their heroic
conduct.

After reposing a short period in quarters, the regiment marched
for Bordeaux; and at Bazas the Portuguese brigade, which had long
served with the sixth division, was separated from it to return
to Portugal; a feeling of respect for these brave companions in
war pervaded all ranks of the British army: many reciprocal acts
of kindness had marked the estimation in which the soldiers of the
British and Portuguese armies held each other.

On the 30th of June, the regiment embarked for Ireland, when the
following order was issued:--“Major-General Lambert cannot allow
the regiments composing the left brigade of the sixth division
of the army under the Duke of Wellington, to separate without
requesting the officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers,
to accept his best thanks for their services while under his
command. Though the period has not been long, yet it will be ever
memorable; and the distinguished good conduct of the brigade, so
repeatedly mentioned during this period, especially in the action
of the 10th of April, will ever make him consider his appointment
to the brigade as one of the most fortunate events of his military
life.”

At the close of the services of the regiment in the Peninsula
and South of France, the names of the following non-commissioned
officers, whose meritorious services had been rewarded with
commissions, were inserted in the Record Book,--

  William Douglas.
  William Hack.
  James Nevin.
  John Abraham.
  John Robinson.
  William Fortune.
  George Armstrong.
  John Thompson.
  Simon Musgrave.
  William Hall.
  John McKay.
  William Bace.
  Patrick Melvin.
  Andrew Connell.
  Thomas Williams.
  William Scott.
  Francis Begg.
  Christmas Knight.
  John Bell.
  George Tyrrell.
  Samuel Rose.

The regiment landed at Cork in July, and marched to Dundalk, where
the second battalion was disbanded on the 24th of October; the men
fit for duty being transferred to the first battalion.

[Sidenote: 1815]

From Dundalk the regiment marched to Newry, where it was stationed
during the year 1815,--a period memorable in the history of Europe,
on account of the return of Bonaparte to France,--his overthrow on
the field of Waterloo,--and his removal to St. Helena.

[Sidenote: 1816]

In June, 1816, the regiment embarked from Ireland, and proceeded to
Portsmouth, where it landed, and was stationed during the summer
months at Fort Cumberland. In the autumn it embarked for Jamaica,
and arrived at Spanish-town in December.

[Sidenote: 1817]

[Sidenote: 1821]

The regiment was stationed at Spanish-town, Uppark camp,
Stony-hill, and Kingston, in Jamaica, upwards of five years, during
which period it lost by disease seven officers, and three hundred
and fifty-six non-commissioned officers and soldiers.

[Sidenote: 1822]

Having transferred the men who volunteered to remain in the country
to other corps, the regiment embarked from Jamaica in March, 1822,
and landed at Plymouth in May following.

[Sidenote: 1824]

The regiment performed garrison duty at Plymouth until the spring
of 1824, when it proceeded to Ireland; it was stationed at Cork
until October, when it marched to Limerick.

[Sidenote: 1825]

Leaving Limerick in 1825, the regiment proceeded to the counties of
Roscommon, Leitrim, Longford, and Westmeath.

[Sidenote: 1826]

In 1826 the head-quarters were established at Athlone, with
detachments at various stations in the neighbouring counties.

[Sidenote: 1827]

The regiment was assembled at Birr, in June, 1827, and in July
marched to Richmond Barracks, Dublin, where it was divided into six
service and four depôt companies; the service companies embarked
in October for Liverpool, from whence they proceeded by canal to
Fenny Stratford, and afterwards marched to Chatham.

[Sidenote: 1828]

On the 30th of June, 1828, the service companies, under the command
of Lieutenant-Colonel G. E. P. Barlow, embarked from Gravesend for
the island of Ceylon where, they arrived in November, and landed at
Colombo.

Lieut.-General Sir Edward Barnes inspected the SIXTY-FIRST on their
arrival at Ceylon, and inserted the following statement, in his own
hand-writing, in the Record Book of the regiment:--

  “Having inspected the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, commanded by
  Lieut.-Colonel Barlow, it affords me much gratification to place
  upon the Records of the Regiment an expression of my admiration
  of its appearance and high order,--of the coolness, celerity,
  and precision, with which it performed the several evolutions,
  and of its system of interior economy: such a state of things
  evinces the great ability, assiduity, and perseverance of the
  commanding officer, and the able support of Major Wolfe and the
  rest of the officers, and is in the highest degree creditable to
  the non-commissioned officers and soldiers; and greatly enhances
  the pleasure which I feel in the renewal of my long acquaintance
  with the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, and adds very materially and
  essentially to my satisfaction in having it under my command.

        “E. BARNES, _Lieut.-General_.

  “_Colombo, December 18, 1828._”


[Sidenote: 1833]

[Sidenote: 1836]

The depôt companies were withdrawn from Ireland in November, 1833,
and proceeded to Chatham; they returned to Ireland in 1836.

[Sidenote: 1834]

The service companies remained at Colombo until 16th October, 1834,
when they embarked for Trincomalee.

[Sidenote: 1837]

On the 22nd May, 1837, the regiment sustained a loss of three
officers, viz., Lieutenants Shaw and Harkness and Ensign Walker,
who were unfortunately drowned, while on a shooting excursion, by
the upsetting of a boat, in a squall off Cottiac.

The service companies re-embarked for Colombo in July, and after
being inspected by Major-General Sir John Wilson, they marched for
Kandy, where they arrived on the 22nd August, 1837.

[Sidenote: 1838]

On the promotion of Colonel Edward Darley to the rank of
major-general, on the 28th June, 1838, Major Charles Forbes was
advanced to the lieutenant-colonelcy, and the command of the
service companies devolved on Major Simmonds.

While on duty at Kandy, the following order was inserted in the
Regimental Record Book, by Lieutenant-General Sir John Wilson,
K.C.B., in his own hand-writing, viz:--

  “Being on the eve of my departure from Ceylon, I feel much
  pleasure in adding to the honourable testimonies contained in
  the regimental records, the expression of my approbation of the
  general good conduct and military discipline manifested by the
  SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, during a period of seven years that it has
  served under my orders, it having been, during a great part of
  that time, under the command of the present Major-General Darley.

  “It is gratifying to me to be able to state, that at the present
  half-yearly inspection, after a lapse of so many years, I find
  the regiment in the same high state of moral and military
  discipline, in which I had the satisfaction of finding it on my
  arrival to assume this command, and which had previously called
  forth the highest eulogiums from my predecessor.

  “To have maintained this character during a period of more than
  ten years’ service in this colony, is a circumstance which cannot
  but be considered to reflect great credit on the officers,
  non-commissioned officers, and privates of this distinguished
  corps, and will, no doubt, meet with a just appreciation in their
  own country, to the shores of which (as the regiment is about to
  return home) I earnestly wish them a speedy and prosperous voyage.

  “I cannot conclude without requesting the present commanding
  officer, Major Simmonds, to accept my best acknowledgments for
  the zeal and attention displayed by him in the command of the
  SIXTY-FIRST Regiment.”

        (Signed) “JOHN WILSON, _Lieut.-General_,
        “_Commanding the Forces_.”

  _Dated “Kandy, 27th December, 1838.”_


[Sidenote: 1839]

On the 12th February, 1839, the regiment marched to Colombo,
preparatory to its embarkation for England; and on the 3rd March,
Her Majesty’s troop-ship ship “Jupiter” came to anchor in Colombo
roads, having on board the service companies of the Ninety-fifth
Regiment, under the command of Colonel James Campbell, intended
for the relief of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment; but in consequence of
disturbances in India, the embarkation of the regiment was directed
to be delayed.

After performing duty in various parts of the island of Ceylon for
eleven years, during which period the regiment lost six officers
and three hundred non-commissioned officers and privates, it
embarked for England on board of Her Majesty’s ship “Jupiter,”
and the following general order was issued by the General Officer
commanding, dated “Head Quarters, Colombo, 22nd October, 1839:”--

  “In taking leave of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, which will embark
  to-morrow for England, Major-General Sir Robert Arbuthnot should
  not do justice to his own feelings, and this distinguished corps,
  whose gallantry he has so often witnessed in the field, if he
  did not express the great satisfaction he felt in assuming the
  command of this island, to find at his first and last inspection,
  that the same excellent system, discipline, steadiness under
  arms, and interior arrangements existed in time of peace, which
  had been the means of gaining them so great honour in time of war.

  “In wishing Major Simmonds, the officers and soldiers of the
  regiment, a prosperous and speedy voyage to England, the
  major-general must express his warm acknowledgment to the former
  for the anxious zeal displayed by him while in command of the
  regiment; to the officers for the able support they have given
  him, ‘and which is so essential to the well-being of any corps,’
  and to the non-commissioned officers and privates, who merit all
  the praise he can bestow, and who, in quitting the colony, leave
  behind them the regrets and good wishes of all classes, which of
  itself, after a residence of eleven years, is sufficient proof
  of the good system, discipline, and general respectability of a
  corps.”


[Sidenote: 1840]

In consequence of meeting with stress of weather in the British
Channel, Her Majesty’s ship “Jupiter” put into the Cove of Cork,
on the 4th of March, 1840, and was towed over to Southampton, by
the steam-frigate “Cyclops,” having on board the depôt companies
from Ireland. The whole regiment landed at Southampton on the 12th
of March, and proceeded by railroad to Winchester; where it was
inspected by Major-General the Honorable Sir Hercules Pakenham,
commanding the South-West district, and subsequently by Lord Hill,
the General Commanding in Chief, both of whom were pleased to
express their entire approbation of its appearance, discipline, and
interior economy.

In August following it was removed to Woolwich, and performed the
dockyard duties there, and at Deptford, until the summer of the
following year.

General the Right Honorable Sir George Hewett, Bart., G.C.B., died
a few days after the arrival of the regiment in England, and Her
Majesty was pleased to confer the colonelcy of the regiment on
Major-General Sir John Gardiner, K.C.B., Deputy Adjutant-General of
the Forces.

[Sidenote: 1841]

In June 1841, the regiment proceeded by railroad to the Northern
district, and was detached in the counties of Northumberland, York,
and Lancaster.

In consequence of the reverses sustained by the British troops in
Affghanistan, in the winter of 1841, the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment was
ordered to recruit to the Indian establishment of one thousand rank
and file, and to prepare, with the Fifty-eighth Regiment, to embark
for India.

[Sidenote: 1842]

The successful campaign of the following season, and the withdrawal
of the troops from the Affghan territory, occasioned an alteration
in the destination of the regiment.

In August, 1842, two companies, under the command of Major
Burnside, were called upon by the civil authorities of Halifax, to
suppress a formidable and organised riot which broke out in that
town: numbers of the rioters had assembled from the adjacent towns,
and were so confident in their strength and numbers as to attack
a party of the Eleventh Hussars, several of whom were severely
injured. The detachment of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment was fired on by
the mob, and Captain Hoey and five men were wounded with slugs.
The order was then given to the Military to fire, when the peace
of the town was speedily restored. The owners and occupiers of the
mills and other property at Halifax, and in the neighbourhood,
conveyed a vote of thanks to Major Burnside for his services on
this occasion.

[Sidenote: 1843]

In March, 1843, the regiment was directed to furnish, by
volunteers, two hundred men to the Ninety-eighth Regiment, in
China: the required number were immediately produced; and the
detachment embarked on the 1st of April, at Newcastle-on-Tyne, for
Winchester, to join the depôt of the Ninety-eighth Regiment.

In the spring of 1843, the regiment proceeded by railway to
Carlisle, where it embarked for Ireland, and landed at Dublin
on the 6th of April; and was shortly afterwards inspected by
Lieutenant-General the Right Honorable Sir Edward Blakeney,
Commander of the Forces in Ireland, who was pleased to express his
approbation of the appearance of the regiment in the field, and of
its conduct in quarters.

On the 3rd June, five companies, under the command of Major McLeod,
embarked on board of Her Majesty’s steamer “Rhadamanthus” for
Waterford, on a particular service: the detachment landed on the
following day, and re-inforced the garrison in barracks until the
6th June, when it re-embarked and returned to Dublin.

During the stay of the regiment in the garrison of Dublin,
Lieutenant-Colonel Forbes died after a protracted illness. This
distinguished officer had commanded the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment five
years, and by his impartial and temperate exercise of authority, he
had rendered himself respected and beloved by all who had the good
fortune to serve under his command. Upon his decease, Major Henry
Burnside was promoted to the lieutenant-colonelcy on the 9th May,
1843.

In July, 1843, the regiment proceeded from Dublin to Limerick,
where it is stationed at the commencement of the year 1844, to
which period this record of its services is brought.

[Sidenote: 1844]

On the 20th January, 1844, Her Majesty was pleased to remove
Lieutenant-General Sir John Gardiner from the SIXTY-FIRST to the
Fiftieth Regiment, in succession to Lieutenant-General Sir Hudson
Lowe, deceased, and to appoint Major-General Sir Jeremiah Dickson,
K.C.B., to the colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment.

Few regiments have been engaged in services which have called
into exercise the moral and physical energies of the officers
and soldiers to a greater extent than the duties in which the
SIXTY-FIRST REGIMENT has been employed; and none have displayed the
heroic virtues of the British military character more fully than
this meritorious corps.

Whether at the Fort of ST. PHILIP, in Minorca,--in the valley of
the Tagus, at TALAVERA,--on the plains of SALAMANCA,--on the lofty
PYRENEES,--or in the southern provinces of FRANCE, the same valour,
constancy, patience, and perseverance, have shone forth with a
splendour which has elevated the reputation of the corps; and its
conduct in quarters has also elicited the commendations of the
general officers under whom it has served. Deriving its origin from
the Third Regiment of Foot, or the BUFFS, the SIXTY-FIRST REGIMENT
has inherited the same spirit which animated the officers and
soldiers of that veteran corps during the wars of three centuries.


1844.




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

OF

THE SIXTY-FIRST,

OR,

THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT OF

FOOT.


GRANVILLE ELLIOTT.

_Appointed 21st April, 1758._

GRANVILLE ELLIOTT served with distinction in the army of the
Emperor of Germany, and returned to England with the reputation
of a brave and experienced officer; he was admitted into the
British service, by King George II., in 1758, with the rank of
major-general, and was appointed colonel of the SIXTY-FIRST
Regiment, on its formation from the second battalion of the Third
Foot, or the Buffs. He commanded a brigade, under Charles, Duke
of Marlborough, in the expedition to St. Maloes in 1758; and
afterwards proceeded to Germany, where he served as major-general,
under Prince Ferdinand of Brunswick. His experience in continental
service induced him to suggest to the British government the
advantage of having a considerable portion of light cavalry in
the army. The subject was previously under consideration, and the
formation of regiments of light dragoons was commenced in the
following year. He died in Germany in 1759.


GEORGE GRAY.

_Appointed 19th July, 1759._

GEORGE GRAY was many years an officer in the household cavalry, and
in July, 1749, he was promoted lieutenant-colonel of the first
troop, now first regiment, of Life Guards. In 1759, King George
II. rewarded him with the colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment,
from which he was removed, in 1768, to the Thirty-seventh. He was
promoted to the rank of major-general in 1761, and to that of
lieut.-general in 1770. He died in 1773.


JOHN GORE.

_Appointed 9th May, 1768._

The early services of this officer were in the third regiment
of Foot Guards, in which corps he was promoted captain and
lieutenant-colonel, in 1750, first major, with the rank of colonel,
in 1760, and lieutenant-colonel in 1771 On the 10th of July, 1762,
he was advanced to the rank of major-general; and in 1768 he was
nominated to the colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment: in 1772 he
was promoted to the rank of lieut.-general, and was removed to the
Sixth Foot in February of the following year. He died in November,
1773.


JOHN BARLOW.

_Appointed 19th February, 1773._

JOHN BARLOW was many years an officer in the Third regiment of
foot, or the Buffs, with which corps he served at the battle of
Dettingen. He was promoted captain of a company on the 22nd of
February, 1745, and afterwards served with the Buffs at the battles
of Fontenoy, Falkirk, and Culloden; also at the battle of Val
in 1747. In 1755 he was promoted major of the Buffs, and on the
formation of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, from the second battalion of
the Third Foot, he was nominated to the lieut.-colonelcy of that
corps, which he commanded in the expedition to the West Indies,
and distinguished himself on several occasions at the reduction of
Guadeloupe in 1759. His services were rewarded with the colonelcy
of the regiment in 1773; and in August, 1777, he was promoted to
the rank of major general. He died in 1778.


STAATES LONG MORRISS.

_Appointed 14th May. 1778._

This officer served with reputation in the reign of King George II;
was promoted to the rank of captain in the Thirty-sixth Regiment
in May, 1756; and in 1758 he was employed in the expedition to St.
Maloes, under Charles, Duke of Marlborough. He took great interest
in the formation of the Eighty-ninth Regiment, of which he was
appointed lieutenant-colonel commandant in October, 1759: he served
at the head of this corps until 1763, when it was disbanded. He was
promoted to the rank of colonel in 1772; to that of major-general
in 1777; and in the following year he was nominated to the
colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment. He was advanced to the rank
of lieut.-general in 1782, and to that of general in 1796. He died
in 1800.


SIR GEORGE HEWETT, BART., G.C.B.

_Appointed 4th April, 1800._

GEORGE HEWETT was many years an officer of the Seventieth Foot, in
which corps he was promoted to the rank of captain in June, 1775,
and he served in North America during the war of independence. In
December, 1781, he was promoted to a majority in the Forty-third
Regiment, with which corps he served with reputation, and was
advanced to the rank of colonel in March, 1794: in May, 1796,
he was promoted to the rank of major-general, and on the 5th
of August, 1799, he was nominated colonel commandant of the
second battalion of the Fifth Foot; in 1800, King George III.
conferred upon him the colonelcy of the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment.
He served in the East Indies, and also in the West Indies; was
promoted to the rank of lieut.-general in September, 1803. He was
inspecting general of the Recruiting Department in 1803; and at the
commencement of the war with France, the Government placed under
his orders all the corps raised under the provisions of the Army of
Reserve Act. He was subsequently commander-in-chief in Ireland; and
in 1806 he was appointed commander-in-chief in the East Indies,
the duties of which important situation he performed five years.
On the 4th of June, 1813, he was promoted to the rank of general,
and in November of the same year he was created a baronet: he was
afterwards honoured with the dignity of Knight Grand Cross of the
most honourable Order of the Bath. He performed the duties of
barrack-master-general for a short period. He was of a kind and
benevolent disposition, was highly esteemed for his social virtues,
and distinguished as a benefactor to the poor. He took an interest
in the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, of which he was colonel forty years,
and expressed a wish to see his corps once more; but took his bed
on the day it landed at Southampton, from the island of Ceylon, and
died on the 21st of March, 1840, at his seat at Freemantle Park,
near Southampton. He was a member of the privy council for Ireland
at the time of his decease.


SIR JOHN GARDINER, K.C.B.

_Appointed 30th March 1840._

Removed to the Fiftieth Regiment in 1844.


SIR JEREMIAH DICKSON, K.C.B.

_Appointed 20th January, 1844._




APPENDIX.

  _Journal of a March of a Detachment of Troops under the command
  of_ LIEUTENANT-COLONEL JOHN JAMES BARLOW, SIXTY-FIRST REGIMENT,
  _from Cosseir in Upper Egypt to Kenè on the Nile_.


I arrived in His Majesty’s ship the “Wilhelmina,” Capt. Sind, at
Cosseir, from Mocha, on the 14th July, 1801, after a passage,
_against the monsoon_, of two months.

_July 17th._--I was ordered to hold myself in readiness to march
across the desert to Kenè on the Nile, a distance of about 130
miles, and to take under my command four companies of His Majesty’s
SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, and a detachment of His Majesty’s Tenth
Regiment, infantry, together with a small party of the Eighth
Light Dragoons,--these amounted to 582 soldiers;--twenty boxes
of treasure were likewise put under my escort. The line of march
consisted of upwards of 850 men, including Indian followers, Arab
camel-drivers, &c., &c.

Before I proceed upon my journal of the very fatiguing march I
underwent, I shall mention a few observations upon Cosseir, in
Upper Egypt. This place is well known as a seaport, and it is,
perhaps, one of the most miserable spots in the universe; a few
wretched mud-houses placed along the beach, with some narrow
lanes branching off at right angles, in all about two hundred
_habitations_, compose this abominable little town. Just above it,
stands a fort which the French had put into a tolerably defensible
state; at all events, it was an _impregnable fortification_ against
the combined native force of Upper Egypt. About three-quarters of
a mile to the westward of it, was the ground where the Indian army
was encamped; this situation is in nature the most sterile and
arid, not a blade of any kind of verdure to be seen,--vegetation of
every description is totally wanting,--and the wearied eye meets
no object but the bare, rugged, and burnt-up hills which bound the
view towards the desert. This frightful country appears quite
unfit for the existence of human beings; nature has furnished it
with no sources of fresh water, and that indispensable necessary
of life is only to be obtained by digging wells in the sand, into
which oozes a kind of bitter salt water, the most _offensive thing_
to the taste imaginable; and its effects are no less noxious,--as
people who drink it are always (at first) attacked with a violent
vomiting and purging, which is accompanied by the most intolerable
and burning thirst. Our soldiers were nearly to a man, in a more or
less degree, afflicted with this disease, and though it only proved
fatal to a few, still it handled very roughly all those who were
under the necessity of using this detestable water. The heat when
I was at Cosseir was almost intolerable. Provisions were plentiful
and cheap,--the fish excellent; but although the inhabitants
possess as fine wheat as any in Europe, their bread was detestable,
being a kind of dough cake half-baked, or rather burnt, in the
dusty ashes.

_July 18th._--Every preparation having been made, I marched at six
o’clock, P.M., with the troops, followers, drivers, &c., as already
stated; and our line of march was considerably increased by a
number of asses, the property of individuals, who had loaded these
useful animals with an independent supply of water. We continued
our route, keeping a large range of rocky and burnt-up hills on our
left; a very fine moon shone only to render this dreary scene the
more awful; the setting sun brought us little, if any, relief as
to heat. After marching about five miles we came to some springs,
or rather a black rivulet of water, very bitter, which crosses
the valley through which the road leads. I endeavoured in vain to
prevent the soldiers from drinking of this infernal brook; thirst
was _too imperious_, and I soon found that my orders had been
disregarded by all the rear. Many of the men soon felt the ill
effects of their folly, and began to fall back faint and oppressed,
and this was much aggravated by the very extraordinary closeness of
the heat: what air did exist, was like the breathing of a furnace.

At twelve o’clock we reached the new wells. I reckon the distance
about thirteen miles, where I found a subaltern officer and a few
Sepoys stationed to take charge of, and protect them. After placing
the necessary guards, &c., I ordered the detachment to lie down,
and we enjoyed a most refreshing repose for about three hours. At
this time the captain of the rear-guard came up, and reported that
a great many stragglers were _still_ behind.

I ordered the drums to beat half an hour before day, when the camp
was pitched, and the men sheltered from the sun, which rose with
a most blazing and fiery aspect. From midnight, until a little
after sunrise, the air in the desert is delightfully cool and
refreshing (I mean comparatively with the rest of the twenty-four
hours); nature, I suppose, has kindly ordained this comfort to the
unfortunate travellers, and still more miserable inhabitants of
this dreary waste.

_July 19th._--It was late in the day when all our stragglers
came up. I was much concerned to find that the mussacks[9] (or
water-bags) had leaked considerably, and that I should be under the
necessity of replenishing them from the wells of this post. I must
here observe, that General Baird had caused, both at this and other
posts on the desert, wells to be dug, in order to procure a supply
of that greatest of all necessaries of life (in such a climate as
this)--water. In these scanty sources, it was thick and muddy;
however, even this, could we have obtained it in abundance, would
have been reckoned a luxury; but, alas! a very limited supply was
all we could get: therefore, at half-past five, P.M., I marched.
We passed for some hours through a long and winding valley; high,
brown, rugged mountains, with here and there a solitary eagle
perched upon a projecting crag, were the only gloomy objects that
presented themselves. We continued our route northerly, through the
same desolate wilderness, and at one o’clock I judged it necessary
to halt; but this halting-place was not to be distinguished from
any accommodations, not from a spring or rivulet of water, not from
any shelter from the scorching sun, and more suffocating hot wind,
but it became a place of repose merely from the total incapacity
of the troops to move a mile further: here then I ordered the
baggage to be unloaded, and the detachment to lie down to rest. I
never suffered the tents to be pitched until just before sunrise,
as I found the soldiers always marched more refreshed by letting
them take their rest the instant they halted, than to undergo the
fatigue and confusion of pitching their tents in the dark. No dew
falls in the desert; the air is so greedy of moisture, that the
least wet is instantly absorbed, and sleeping in the open air was
here a luxury.

_July 20th._--I was much grieved at daylight to find that about
forty men were still behind. I trembled at the horrors these poor
fellows would be exposed to, should they be left destitute and
forlorn in the desert. After seriously reflecting upon this most
melancholy circumstance, I sent for the chief Arab, who, as a kind
of scheik, had some sort of control over the camel-drivers, and
ordered him to collect some of the principal ones; as soon as they
came to my tent, I told them the apprehensions I was under, and
proposed to them to return in the track we had come the day before
for at least seven miles, and promised to reward them liberally for
every soldier they should bring up. All their attention was called
forth by the mention of money, and they became eager to be useful.
Twenty camels set off, and my brother, Captain Frederick Barlow,
SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, very humanely volunteered, notwithstanding
the _intolerable_ heat, to attend the camels. I filled a cag
with a mixture of port wine and water, which he took with him,
and it proved of the most essential service. At the distance of
from four to six miles from camp, he picked up twenty-one poor
exhausted fainting wretches, who, without this assistance, must
have died in a very few hours: some not able to speak, and the
whole totally incapable of walking a step further. One fine lad in
particular, was so far gone, as to lay stretched out on the sand
as if expiring; but upon pouring some of the wine and water down
his throat, he gradually recovered, and he was brought into camp
in a man’s arms on a camel. Water, and afterwards some wine, soon
restored him to sufficient strength to enable him to proceed on
a camel, with other sick men, that afternoon: before two o’clock
all the absentees got into camp. This day we contrived to dine
tolerably well; but for want of water to wet the bags, our wine was
as hot as milk immediately from the cow,--the water we had to drink
was the same, therefore to quench our thirst was impossible.

At half an hour past nine I marched, and we had not proceeded
two miles, the heat absolutely suffocating, when we were met by
a convoy of camels, loaded with most excellent water. This very
seasonable supply had been forwarded to us from Moila, owing to
my having sent on to the officer commanding at that post, to say
how distressed I was for water from the leakage of our mussacks.
Many of the soldiers quitted their ranks, and eagerly ran up to
the camels to seize upon the water. I had no little difficulty
in restraining them. I even told the officers to acquaint their
men, that I would not permit the camels to be unloaded if the
least irregularity took place. This had an immediate effect; and
as the detachment stood in open column of half companies, the
whole, in less than an hour, were regularly served with an ample
supply, besides filling their canteens; as this water came in large
earthern jars, it was quite cool, and had such an astonishing
effect upon the troops, that we were enabled to get on with great
vigour, and at half-past one on the 21st of July, we reached Moila.

This extraordinary spot is situated in a ravine between steep and
rugged rocks, and is uncommonly romantic. Here, then, I found it
absolutely necessary to halt, that is, to remain till the evening
of the 22nd, as the men stood in the greatest need of a little
repose. In the course of the day many Arabs came to the camp with
various articles of provisions for sale. Mutton we received as
rations in abundance,--indeed at every post in the desert where
water was to be had, even in the smallest quantity, General Baird
had made depôts of provisions; therefore we had only to carry the
necessary supply for those halting-places where _no water was to be
found_. All our stragglers reached the camp before two P.M. of this
day.

_July 22nd._--I this day ordered the men to wash their persons,
and otherwise to put themselves into as clean and good order as
circumstances would permit. At six o’clock P.M. we marched. The
road leads through a most romantic valley; at about six miles’
distance, under some craggy rocks on the left hand, are three wells
or springs of water. Three miles from these are the nine mile
wells, where we arrived at about ten P.M. Here I found an officer
and a party of Sepoys, but was informed by him, that my detachment
was so numerous it would very soon drain the pits or wells he was
posted at; and the next day not a drop of water was to be got from
them. At five P.M. I marched, and just before sun-set we saw a wild
beast, which proved to be a lion. We continued our route over the
dreary, desolate, and solitary waste for seven hours, when I found
the men were excessively fatigued. Accordingly I gave orders to
halt, although we had not arrived at the half-way distance between
the nine mile wells and Legattah. We lay down upon a large and
extensive desert plain, and at daylight, as usual, the camp was
pitched. I had despatched a light camel or dromedary to Legattah
with a letter to the officer stationed there, requesting him to
send a supply of water to meet me on my march to that place; and
relying upon his being able to comply with my request, I emptied
the mussacks before I left this dreary halt, which was by much the
worst we had as yet experienced. At six P.M. we marched from this
abominable and burning spot. After six hours’ march the men began
to complain grievously from the want of water, and I confess I
almost feared the officer at Legattah had not found it possible to
send a supply as I had required; however, a little after midnight,
I had the inexpressible satisfaction to perceive a large escort
coming towards us,--the first thing that attracted my attention
was the glittering of the Sepoys’ arms, the moon shining in great
splendour,--which proved to be twenty-eight camels loaded with
water. Words cannot express the sensations of our poor fellows when
I rode along the line of march, telling them a convoy of water was
in front. I halted, and upon inquiry found that a great number had
fallen behind; after supplying all the others in an ample way, I
caused a captain’s guard, a surgeon, and seven camels’ load of
water, together with every light and unloaded camel we could spare
to remain in this spot, in order to bring up the stragglers. I
then told the rest that those able to march might go on with me,
as after an hour’s rest I was resolved to push on for Legattah
(then distant nine miles) with the treasure and those of the troops
capable of proceeding. To my great surprise, almost the whole said
they could march from the comfortable supply of water they had
first had, and the short repose I had given them; therefore, after
leaving some of the most weakly with a captain, two subalterns,
one surgeon, the water and camels as above stated, I continued my
route, and after two hours’ march had the satisfaction to come in
sight of the lights of Legattah camp. So fatiguing was this forced
march, that I was frequently in danger of falling from my horse
from sleep. An officer of the Tenth Regiment fell from an ass he
rode, and hurt himself considerably. I got in just before the dawn
of day, _all of us exceedingly exhausted_; and it was not until
three P.M. that the captain with the rear-guard and stragglers
came up; this made it impossible for me to leave the camp until
the evening following,--the poor fellows who dropped in during the
day, panting and fainting, were incapable of further exertions. The
thermometer in my tent was here at 114°.

At Legattah we found a large detachment of Sepoys, under Captain
Mahony, of the Seventh Bombay Regiment: he behaved to us in the
most attentive and liberal manner. We were supplied with every
necessary by this officer; and he fulfilled the duties of his
post, not to the strict letter of his orders, but to the fullest
extent of every humane and hospitable construction of them. The
ensuing march to Buramba was to be a very long one; and I found
it necessary to make it in two, as follows: at six P.M. of the
26th, we left Legattah, and continued our route for six hours
and a half by my watch, when I ordered the detachment to halt,
caused the treasure camels to be unloaded, and directed the rest
with the tents, baggage, sick, &c., to proceed on Buramba. I then
ordered the detachment to be served with plenty of water, when we
all lay down and enjoyed three hours’ most refreshing sleep. A
little before day the drums beat, the treasure was reloaded, and we
proceeded, and arrived at Buramba at six A.M. of the 27th. Here we
first saw verdure: this agreeable prospect opened to us immediately
upon the dawn of day, and infused spirit into everybody. This
village seemed to us a little paradise, and, like sailors arrived
at a shore of plenty and ease, after the perils of shipwreck,
distress, and want, was looked upon by all as a blessed haven.
At noon I despatched an officer with a report to General Baird,
Commander-in-Chief of the Indian army, who was at Kenè on the Nile,
of my having reached Buramba without the loss of a single man; and
at two o’clock A.M. on the 28th, I marched (having previously at
midnight sent on the tents and baggage). Shortly after daylight
we passed two miserable Arab villages; we then found ourselves in
_cultivated ground_, and were eagerly looking out for the glorious
Nile, whose direction we could easily trace from the date-trees and
vegetation apparent upon its banks, although we could not see that
noble river; shortly afterwards we got sight of Kenè, and a mile
or two from it were met by General Baird and his suite. He ordered
me to proceed to the banks of the Nile, and at seven o’clock we
encamped about a quarter of a mile westward of the town of Kenè,
and fifteen yards from the brink of the river. One cannot picture
the joy we all felt at arriving amongst our brother soldiers, after
the ten days of uncommon fatigue we had just experienced. Kenè
abounded with every kind of provision, such as mutton, poultry,
fish, milk, vegetables, &c., the whole at the most reasonable
rates. The heat in this camp was excessive, certainly greater than
at Cosseir. The General ordered the troops to be in readiness to
embark in d’jirms, already collected to convey the army down the
Nile, and which were to rendezvous at Cairo, where the General
meant to collect all his army, in order to carry it entire to
Rosetta, from which place he could make every arrangement for our
junction with the English army before Alexandria. We embarked on
the 2nd of August; the SIXTY-FIRST Regiment, about 900 strong, was
allowed seventeen d’jirms, and fell down with the current. The
distance to Cairo is about 400 miles. We arrived at that celebrated
place on the 11th. The army encamped on the island of Rhoda on the
Nile, between Cairo and Gaza; and on the 28th, the whole being
collected, we re-embarked and proceeded towards Rosetta; and on
the 31st we landed and encamped at El Hamed, four miles to the
southward of that town; two days after which the General changed
his camp to Aboumandour, so called from the tower which stands
just above the Nile, about one mile and a quarter to the S.E. of
Rosetta: it was from this tower that Pousseilgue made such accurate
remarks upon the memorable battle between the English and French
fleets in Aboukir Bay.

        J. J. BARLOW,
        _Lieut.-Colonel, 61st Regiment_.


SIXTY-FIRST REGIMENT.

RETURN OF CASUALTIES during the PENINSULAR WAR, from 1809 to 1814.

  +----------------+------------------------------------------------+
  | Place and Date |               NAMES OF OFFICERS.               |
  |                |                                                |
  |   of Action.   +-----------------------+------------------------+
  |                |        Killed.        |        Wounded.        |
  |                |                       |                        |
  +----------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
  |                |                       | Major R. J. Coghlan    |
  |                |                       | Captain A. Hartley     |
  |                |                       |   ”    W. Furnace      |
  | Battle of      | Major H. F. Orpen     |   ”    J. Laing        |
  | TALAVERA,      | Captain H. James      |   ”    D. Goodman      |
  | 27th and 28th  | Lieut. D. J. Hemus    | Lieut. G. Collins      |
  | July, 1809.    |                       |   ”    H. T. Tench     |
  |                |                       |   ”    G. McLean       |
  |                |                       |   ”    J. Given        |
  |                |                       | Ensign W. Brackenbury  |
  |                |                       | Adjutant R. Drew       |
  +----------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
  | Storming the   |                       |                        |
  | Forts at       |                       | Captain J. Owen        |
  | Salamanca,     |                       | Lieut. J. Given        |
  | 22nd June, 1812|                       |                        |
  +----------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
  |                |                       | Major J. Downing (died)|
  |                |                       |Captain S. Favell (died)|
  |                |                       |   ”    J. Oke          |
  |                |                       |   ”    W. McLeod       |
  |                |                       |   ”    W. Greene       |
  |                |                       | Lieut. S. Falkner      |
  |                | Lieut.-Col. F. Barlow |   ”    H Daniel        |
  | Battle of      | Captain G. Stubbs     |   ”    J. Chapman      |
  | SALAMANCA,     |    ”   P. B. P. Horton|   ”  J. Chipchase      |
  |22nd July, 1812.| Lieut. A. Chawner     |   ”    T. Gloster      |
  |                |   ”    J. Parker      |   ”    N. Furnace      |
  |                | Ensign H. Bere        |   ”    J. Collis       |
  |                |                       |   ”    J. Wolfe        |
  |                |                       |   ”    W. Brackenbury  |
  |                |                       |   ”    J. Royal        |
  |                |                       |   ”    A. Toole        |
  |                |                       | Ensign W. White        |
  |                |                       |   ”    J. F. Singleton |
  +----------------+-----------------------+------------------------+
  | Siege of the   |                       |                        |
  | Castle of      |                       | Lieut. G. Stuart       |
  | BURGOS,        |                       |                        |
  |in October, 1812|                       |                        |
  +----------------+-----------------------+------------------------+


      +----------------+--------+------------------------------------+
      | Place and Date |        |             Total Loss.            |
      |                |        +---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |   of Action.   |        |Officers.|Serjeants.|Drummers.|Rank |
      |                |        |         |          |         |and  |
      |                |        |         |          |         |File.|
      +----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      | Battle of      |        |         |          |         |     |
      | TALAVERA,      |Killed  |     3   |    --    |    1    |  45 |
      | 27th and 28th  |Wounded |    11   |    10    |   --    | 186 |
      | July, 1809.    |Missing |    --   |    --    |   --    |  16 |
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      +----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      | Storming the   |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      | Forts at       |  and  }|     2   |     1    |   --    |  12 |
      | Salamanca,     |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      | 22nd June, 1812|        |         |          |         |     |
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      +----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      | Battle of      |        |         |          |         |     |
      | SALAMANCA,     |Killed  |     6   |     3    |    1    |  35 |
      |22nd July, 1812.|Wounded |    18   |    22    |    1    | 280 |
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      +----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      | Siege of the   |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      | Castle of      |  and  }|     1   |    --    |   --    |  10 |
      | BURGOS,        |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      |in October, 1812|        |         |          |         |     |
      |                |        |         |          |         |     |
      +----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+




  +------------------+------------------------------------------------+
  | Place and Date   |                NAMES OF OFFICERS.              |
  |                  |                                                |
  |   of Action.     +-------------------------+----------------------+
  |                  |        Killed.          |        Wounded.      |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  | Battle of the    |                         | Captain E. Charleton |
  | PYRENEES,        |                         |   ”    G. McLean     |
  | 28th July, 1813. |                         | Lieut. J. Wolfe      |
  |                  |                         |   ”    G. O’Kearney  |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  |                  |                         | Captain J. Horton    |
  | Battle of the    | Captain W. H. Furnace   |   ”    M. Annesley   |
  | NIVELLE,         | Lieut. C. Kellet        |   ”    H. Eccles     |
  | 10th Nov., 1813. |                         | Lieut. R. Belton     |
  |                  |                         |   ”    A. Toole      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  | Battle of the    |                         | Captain W. Greene    |
  | NIVE,            |                         |   ”     E. Charleton |
  | 9th Dec., 1813.  |                         |                      |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  | Battle of        |                         |                      |
  | ORTHES,          |                         |                      |
  | 27th Feb., 1814. |                         |                      |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  | At TARBES,       |                         |                      |
  | 1st March, 1814. |                         |                      |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  | At GRENADA,      |                         |                      |
  | 2nd March, 1814. |                         |                      |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+
  |                  |                         | Lieut.-Col. J. Oke   |
  |                  |                         | Captain W. Greene    |
  |                  |                         |   ”    E. Charleton  |
  |                  |                         | Lieut. A. Porteus    |
  |                  |                         |   ”    N. Furnace    |
  |                  |                         |   ”    T. Gloster    |
  | Battle of        |Lieut.-Col. R. J. Coghlan|   ”    D. O’Kearney  |
  | TOULOUSE,        | Lieut. H. Arden         |   ”    J. Wolfe      |
  | 10th April, 1814.| Ensign W. A. Favell     |   ”    E. Gaynor     |
  |                  |                         |   ”    W. White      |
  |                  |                         |   ”    J. Harris     |
  |                  |                         |   ”    G. Stewart    |
  |                  |                         |   ”    J. H. Ellison |
  |                  |                         | Ensign J. Wright     |
  |                  |                         |   ”    C. Eccles     |
  |                  |                         |   ”    S. Bartlett   |
  |                  |                         |                      |
  +------------------+-------------------------+----------------------+

      +-----------------+--------+------------------------------------+
      | Place and Date  |        |             Total Loss.            |
      |                 |        +---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |   of Action.    |        |Officers.|Serjeants.|Drummers.|Rank |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |and  |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |File.|
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |Battle of the    |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      |PYRENEES,        |  and  }|    4    |    --    |   --    |  70 |
      |28th July, 1813. |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |Battle of the    |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      |NIVELLE,         | and   }|    7    |     5    |   --    |  82 |
      |10th Nov., 1813. |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |Battle of the    |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      |NIVE,            |  and  }|    2    |    --    |   --    |   8 |
      |9th Dec., 1813.  |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |Battle of        |Killed }|         |          |         |     |
      |ORTHES,          |  and  }|   --    |     1    |         |  10 |
      |27th Feb., 1814. |Wounded}|         |          |         |     |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |At TARBES,       |Wounded |   --    |    --    |   --    |   4 |
      |1st March, 1814. |        |         |          |         |     |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |At GRENADA       |Killed  |   --    |    --    |   --    |   1 |
      |2nd March, 1814. |Wounded |   --    |    --    |   --    |   4 |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+
      |Battle of        |        |         |          |         |     |
      |TOULOUSE,        |Killed  |    3    |     1    |   --    |  13 |
      |10th April, 1814.|Wounded |   16    |     7    |   --    | 140 |
      |                 |        |         |          |         |     |
      +-----------------+--------+---------+----------+---------+-----+




FOOTNOTES:

[1] BEATSON’S _Naval and Military Memoirs_.

[2] Lieutenant-General the Honorable James Murray’s answer to this
proposal is printed in BEATSON’S _Naval and Military Memoirs_, and
is as follows:--

        “_Fort St. Philip, October 16, 1781._
  “Sir,

      “When your brave ancestor was desired by his sovereign to
  assassinate the Duc de Guise, he returned the answer which you
  should have done, when the King of Spain charged you to assassinate
  the character of a man whose birth is as illustrious as your own,
  or that of the Duc de Guise. I can have no further communication
  with you but in arms. If you have any humanity, you may send
  clothing to your unfortunate prisoners in my possession; leave it
  at a distance, because I will admit of no contact for the future
  but such as is hostile in the most inveterate degree.

        “I am, &c.,
        “JAMES MURRAY.”

  “_To the Duc de Crillon._”


[3] Lieut.-Colonel Barlow wrote a journal of this march, which is
printed at the end of this Record.

[4] The grenadier company of the SIXTY-FIRST was selected
by Major-General Stuart, for his personal escort during the
reconnoissance which he made before the battle.

[5] Casualties at the battle of Salamanca,--

                                  Officers.  Soldiers.
  Strength in the field.              27        420
  Killed and wounded                  24        342
                                      --        ---
  Remaining                            3         78

Six reliefs of officers and serjeants were shot under the colours.

[6] Lieut.-Colonel ROBERT JOHN COGHLAN was a most distinguished
and gallant officer, and highly respected and beloved by the
SIXTY-FIRST, who cherished the memory of his exalted virtues w
peculiar veneration. The regimental record shows the number of
times he led the corps to battle and to victory, and the honorary
distinctions he had acquired. The Duke of Wellington directed his
remains to be removed from the grave in which they had been hastily
laid, on the field of battle, and honored with a public funeral
himself attending to pay the last tribute of respect to departed
valour. A marble slab, placed by his brother officers in the
Protestant churchyard of Toulouse, marks the spot where the remains
of this gallant officer are deposited.

[7] Lieutenant Norbury Furnace had fought with his regiment in
every battle and skirmish in which it had been engaged in the
Peninsula and South of France, and had lost two brothers gallantly
combating in the same cause.

[8] Lieutenant William White was on his way to join the regiment
from Ireland; hearing at Tarbes of the probability of an action
at Toulouse, he travelled by post to arrive in time to take part
in it. He was twice wounded, and, although bleeding profusely, he
refused to quit his post. A general officer saw the state he was
in, and directed him to be taken to the surgeons.

[9] Mussacks are large leathern bags made so as to hold water, and
are placed on the backs of camels like panniers.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  The roman page numbering at the front of the book goes from iii
  to viii, then from v to viii again; this has not been changed.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg vi: page number ‘53’ added to the ‘Conclusion’ entry.
  Pg 11: ‘Guadaloupe’ replaced by ‘Guadeloupe’.
  Pg 12: ‘Sidenote: 1771’ inserted before ‘Three years ...’
         (to be consistent with the Table of Contents entry for 1771).
  Pg 15: ‘Guadaloupe’ replaced by ‘Guadeloupe’.
  Pg 22: ‘the troop under’ replaced by ‘the troops under’.
  Pg 49: ‘preparatorily to its’ replaced by ‘preparatory to its’.
  Pg 56: ‘Guadaloupe’ replaced by ‘Guadeloupe’.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE SIXTY-FIRST, OR THE SOUTH GLOUCESTERSHIRE REGIMENT OF FOOT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


