The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Journal of the Maine Ornithological Society, Vol. XI. No. 2
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Journal of the Maine Ornithological Society, Vol. XI. No. 2

Author: Various

Editor: W. H. Brownson


        
Release date: April 25, 2019 [eBook #59355]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/59355

Credits: Produced by Wayne Hammond and The Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE MAINE ORNITHOLOGICAL SOCIETY, VOL. XI. NO. 2 ***




Produced by Wayne Hammond and The Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)









  Vol. XI        25 cents a copy
  No. 2          $1.00 a year

  June, 1909

  The Journal

  of the

  Maine Ornithological Society

  [Illustration: Bird Protection, Bird Study,
  The Spread of the Knowledge thus
  Gained, These Are Our Objects.]

  Editor, W. H. BROWNSON, Portland Associate Editor, LOUIS E. LEGGE,
  Portland Published by the Society at 97 1-2 Exchange Street, Portland,
  Maine

  Entered as second class matter June 13, 1905, at the post office at
  Portland, Maine, under the Act of Congress of March 3, 1879.




  JOURNAL

  OF THE

  Maine Ornithological Society.

  OFFICIAL PUBLICATION OF THE MAINE ORNITHOLOGISTS

  Issued every quarter on the first of March, June, September
  and December of each year

  Publication Office: 97 1-2 Exchange St., Portland, Maine.

  Editor, W. H. BROWNSON,      Associate Editor, LOUIS E. LEGGE,
        Portland.                         Portland.

  Price, $1.00 per annum.      Single Copies, 25 Cents.

  Address W. H. Brownson, 85 Market Street, Portland, Me.


The Maine Ornithological Society comprises in its membership the
leading ornithologists and bird students of Maine. The membership
is constantly increasing and the interest in the society was never
greater than now. If you are interested in birds and wish to know more
about them you should by all means send in your name for membership
in this society. The dues are one dollar a year, and payment of this
sum entitles each person elected to membership to the JOURNAL free of
charge. Application for membership should be made to the Secretary, Mr.
Dana W. Sweet, Phillips, Maine. Mr. Sweet is also the treasurer and the
annual dues should be paid to him. All persons, both young and old, are
eligible to membership. It is not necessary for one to be versed in
bird lore in order to insure his election to this society. The larger
the membership the more can be done in the way of improving the JOURNAL
and increasing its size. Send in your name without further delay. The
society will be glad to welcome you to its meetings, which are held
once a year in different cities. The officers of the society are as
follows:

  _President_, Dr. H. H. BROCK, Portland.

  _Vice President_, J. MERTON SWAIN, Farmington.

  _Secretary and Treasurer_, DANA W. SWEET, Phillips.

  _Councillors_, WALTER H. RICH, Portland;
                 Dr. WILLIAM C. KENDALL, Freeport.

  _Editor_, W. H. BROWNSON, Portland.

  _Associate Editor_, LOUIS E. LEGGE, Portland.

[Illustration: HUNGARIAN OR GRAY PARTRIDGE.

(_Perdix-cinerea_)

FROM A DRAWING BY WALTER H. RICH, PORTLAND, MAINE.]




  The Journal

  of the

  Maine Ornithological Society

  Published by the Society on the first of March, June, September and December

  Vol. XI          JUNE, 1909          No. 2




The "Hungarian Partridge"--the Gray Partridge.

(_Perdix cinerea._)

By WALTER H. RICH, Portland.


For the purpose of advancing the interests of our supply of game and
its protection and propagation, a number of local sportsmen have
formed a society under the title of "The Cumberland County Fish and
Game Protective Association." As first fruits of their endeavors, and
as earnest of their intentions, they have imported and liberated in
five or six colonies in the neighborhood of Portland, fifty pairs of
"Hungarian Partridge" (_Perdix cinerea_), generally considered the
prime game bird of Europe.

The society has secured the passage of an act establishing a close time
of four years, with the proper penalties for non-observance thereof.

In its numerous species and varieties the race is scattered all through
temperate Europe, prospering best in its milder regions and shunning
extremes of either heat or cold. Its range extends from southern
Scandinavia and England on the north and west, Naples on the south,
eastward through Persia, India and Tibet, to China. As is natural
over so wide an extent of territory, there is much variation in size
and coloring, but it is upon the great wheat plain of Hungary, where
they thrive best and are exceedingly numerous, that the birds of this
species attain their greatest size.

The relationship of the Old World Partridges with our "Quails," as
we usually term them, seems to be very close. The American group, as
most of our members probably know, is separated from its over-sea
relatives chiefly because its members have a more or less distinct
serration on the cutting edge of the mandible near the tip. This is
scarcely apparent in some species. The bill in our American group
(_Odontophorinæ_) seems more arched, giving it a shorter and heavier
appearance. In the Hungarian Partridge the bill is noticeably flatter
and longer than in our "Quails," and the side view of the head gives
a very pigeon-like appearance, save, of course, the lack of the tumid
membrane at the base of the bill as shown in the pigeon.

Of our American Partridges the species most suggesting this bird is the
Plumed Quail of California, though _Perdix_ lacks the plumes, is rather
more brownish in his tones, and is of generally lighter coloring. Our
new citizen is plump and stocky, powerful in figure, short of wing with
a short tail, carried low in Quail fashion. I weighed the largest of
those which I had and he tipped the scales at eleven ounces. He was in
fair order, not fat, and in condition might have weighed thirteen or
fourteen ounces. The meat is dark, which rather surprised me, for I had
taken it for granted that it would be white.

As many of our members may be unfamiliar with the appearance of this
bird, a brief description may not be out of place here. Their markings
are as follows: top of the head, dark yellowish brown; throat, light
reddish buff, with a broad band of the same shade running back above
the eyes to the hind head; above, in general a brownish or yellowish
ash, lightening toward the rump, the feathers here, as also on the
tail coverts, crossed by a broad subterminal band of chestnut, and
everywhere the feathers are finely barred with broken, irregular
dark lines; the scapulars with more or less reddish or chestnut,
and central lines of pale buff; the tail short, carried low like a
Quail's, bright reddish brown; the flight feathers brownish, the
primaries still darker, and all cross-barred with irregular bands
of ochraceous, black-margined; the upper breast bluish ash, growing
lighter below, and brownish on the flanks, where the feathers show
a broad band of chestnut near the tips, and are crossed by fine
vermiculations of darker color, sometimes unbroken lines, but oftener
their mere suggestions made up of small dots; a chestnut "shield," or
"horse-shoe," of considerable size in the middle of the lower breast;
under tail coverts, light yellowish brown, very faintly and finely
barred; feet and legs, brownish flesh color; bill, gray-blue; eyelids,
gray-blue or pale flesh color; iris, brown or red-brown; naked patch
just behind the eye of light orange.

"The dark chestnut 'horse-shoe' on the gray breast is nearly obsolete
in most adult females; female invariably distinguished by widest buff
bands on black scapulars and adjoining wing coverts, which in cock are
light brown with black vermiculations and chestnut blotches. The latter
sex, moreover, has gray instead of brown sides to the neck." (_Ogilvie
Grant._)

There are great variations in coloring. Specimens from dry soil are
said to exhibit the richest hues, while some are occasionally taken
showing white "horse shoe." A particularly dark variety has been
denominated _montana_. There are even records of hybrids between this
species and the red-legged Partridge, and also with the Scotch Grouse.

East of the Altai and Tian Shan this species is replaced by the allied
_Perdix daurica_ (_barbata_), which has lanceolate feathers on the side
of the throat and a black "horse-shoe" on a golden-buff breast. Other
species in South Tibet, North India, Northwest China, and North Tibet.
These last are more hardy, ascending the mountains to the snow line.

The Gray Partridge pairs in February and nests in April, and success in
raising the brood depends much on excess of wet or drought. The nest
is made upon the ground, a circular cavity, lined with grass, in the
herbage and often in exposed situations. Eggs are from nine to twenty,
drab or bluish. It is wellnigh impossible to see the bird upon her
nest, where her blending colors of gray and brown so closely match the
surroundings of dry grass and herbage. Both parents tend the young and
employ the same wiles and tricks to mislead the intruder as does the
Ruffed Grouse or the Bobwhite in a similar situation. Large numbers of
eggs are never hatched, and many a chick falls victim to his enemies
in fur or feather, owing to the exposed position of the nest or the
feeding ground.

These Partridges roost upon the ground at night. Late in the fall they
"pack up" into large coveys, much as do our Prairie Chickens, and these
are said to be equally as wild at this time as are the Chickens in the
same circumstances. Rarely does the Gray Partridge desert the open for
the woods, even in hot weather, only seeking shelter under low brush,
or the broad leaves of the crops, the corn, the cabbage, the turnip,
the clover clump. The larger the cultivation in a district the better
their chance of prospering.

Often pursued, they trust to their legs for escape, or may crouch low
in the grass, motionless, trusting to their plumage's matching tones to
render them invisible. When flushed they rise with a loud whirr--the
flight rather labored until under way, when they glide on bowed wing
rapidly and easily. As to their qualities as game birds it is somewhat
too early for us to speak with full decision. They are highly esteemed
in Europe, but are more often driven than hunted over dogs, mainly, it
is said, because the cultivated ground has so little of waste spaces
in hedgerows or brush to lead them to lie close, so they are apt to
run unseen to the end of the furrows and so flush wild. They are swift
of foot and very quick in all their movements. If I were to express
any opinion at present, I should say that I should expect them to do a
great deal of running before the dog, especially when the young have
become well grown, and from the little I have seen I should judge them
to be far inferior in wing power to Grouse or Quail.

I was fortunate enough to have a colony of these birds left in my care
for setting out, and I took them home with me. During the evening I
brought a male bird in to make the acquaintance of the family. I spent
the half-hour in which he lay snuggled under my chin in scratching his
head. At first his heart jumped in lively fashion but he soon quieted
down and merely blinked his eyes in deep content. It seems as though
they would tame very easily.

In their coop they used a great variety of language; they clucked like
a Grouse; they chattered like a Blackbird; they snapped their bills
like an Owl; they "jawed" like a Parrot; they made a guttural note of
alarm like the "br-r-r-r" of a startled Pigeon; they hissed like a
Black Duck guarding her nest, or like a Thomas cat whose dignity is
ruffled not quite enough for anger; and, in addition, they are said to
"crow" at evening. Their Latin name, _Perdix_, is said to be a fairly
close imitation of their call. English? Continental? Or ancient Roman
pronunciation?

Next evening, May 6, 1909, about sundown, I carried them into a
clearing in the woods where was a couple of acres of newly turned soil
sloping down to a brook, the north side well wooded, on the south
open to the sun, and a good bit of cultivated land near by. I placed
the box upon the ground with a corner of the burlap cover loosened so
that they might easily get out. They got out; they stood not upon the
order of their going but went at once. The box was scarcely set down
when they began to stream out into the dusk. They made only a short
flight--twenty yards or so, the longest not over forty--and dropped
into the plowed ground. A few scurried into the woods at the right.
In a moment the gloom was filled with curious noises as the scattered
birds began calling each other. It was as though every wheelbarrow in
the neighborhood had lifted up a voice of protest against the high
price of oil. Presently they gathered together, the last straggler came
out from the woods, and all collected on a little hummock in the midst
of the plowed ground, and viewed their surroundings, as it seemed to
me, with no great approval. They squeaked and called for a few minutes
until finally the whole covey made off on foot, entering the edge of
the brush and apparently settled down for the night. Here we left them
and another experiment in game propagation is under way.

Will they survive or no? It is to be hoped that the optimists may
win this time, for it would be a great pity to lose these beautiful
little creatures. For their welfare during all but the bitterest of
our weather there need be no fear, but the furnishing of the table
of a bird who depends mainly on grain and insects for its sustenance
may become a vital issue when our northern winter descends upon us,
and when the door of the North Pole swings open about January 15th to
stand wide until March 20th, and the north wind comes down, swirling
and heaping the snow through the woods and over the open, I greatly
fear that these little folk will regret the day they left the billowing
grain fields and sunny vine-clad slopes of far-off Hungary.




Occasional Notes on Birds at Sea.

By DR. WILLIAM C. KENDALL, Scientific Assistant U. S. Bureau of
Fisheries.


The following notes were made by the writer while serving as naturalist
on the U. S. Fish Commission Schooner, "Grampus," in 1891, 1894 and
1895, during cruises connected with enquiries relating to mackerel.
These cruises extended from off the coast of Virginia to the Gulf
of St. Lawrence, and even southern Labrador, but all of the notes
are not now available, thus rendering those following more or less
fragmentary, desultory and indefinite. They are copied almost verbatim
from the available notes, about the only change being that of adjusting
such technical names as were used to the more modern nomenclature of
"Knight's Birds of Maine." Owing to the writer's unfamiliarity with
birds, unfortunately they could not always be identified with certainty
when at a distance, and in the case of the Petrels not even when in
hand. Therefore when the species is in the least in doubt the technical
name when used is questioned. Many references are to Phalaropes without
specifying the particular species. This is due mainly to inability to
determine which they were. But always when identifiable the Northern
Phalarope was the more common.

The only excuse the writer has for offering these notes for publication
in the JOURNAL is that he was urged to do so by officers of the
society. So, ever desirous of obliging his friends, he has complied,
even though contrary to good judgment and discretion.


1891.

May 5. Latitude 41° 16´ north; longitude 71° 2´ west. Two Herring Gulls
(_Larus argentatus_) seen flying northwest.

May 8. About 5.5 miles north and west from latitude 39° 46´ north;
longitude 73° 46´ west. Two Herring Gulls were seen in shoreward.
Two Loons (_Gavia imber_) and two Ducks (sp.?) were also observed.
Fresh southwest by west breeze and hazy sky. When about six miles off
Navesink a Yellow Warbler (_Dendroica æstiva_) flew aboard and remained
for some time.

May 9. About 10.30 A. M.; near latitude 39° north; longitude 73° 55´
west. A small flock of Phalaropes (_Phalaropus lobatus?_) and one
Petrel (sp.?) seen. At 12 M. Small numbers of Phalaropes and Petrels
occasionally seen. Latitude 38° 39´ north; longitude 73° 39´ west;
gentle west southwest breeze; temperature of air 56.5°. A flock of
about thirty or more Phalaropes seen. 2.6 miles south and west of
above position several small flocks of Phalaropes were observed.
About latitude 38° 39´ north; longitude 73° 59´ west. Small flocks of
Phalaropes seen. Have seen frequent small flocks during the afternoon.
All the Phalaropes seem to be one species (_P. lobatus?_).

May 10. Near latitude 38° 21´ north; longitude 74° 26´ west; light west
southwest air. A Yellow Rumped Warbler (_Dendroica coronata_) flew
aboard and remained several hours. (About noon; near latitude 38° 18´
north; longitude 74° 24´ west, a red Bat flew aboard). About latitude
38° 15´ north; longitude 74° 22´ west, a few Northern Phalaropes seen.
4.7 knots south and west from latitude 38° 9´ north; longitude 74° 19´
west; temperature air 58°; gentle southwest breeze and somewhat hazy.
Two large flocks of Northern Phalaropes seen.

May 11. Latitude 38° 11´ north; longitude 74° 22´ west; 11 A. M.
Observed small flocks of Northern Phalaropes.

May 18. Latitude 38° 23´ north; longitude 74° 45´ west; 8 A. M. A few
Northern Phalaropes seen. Latitude 38° 3´ north; longitude 74° 39´
west; 11 A. M. Several Petrels (sp.?) seen.

May 19. Latitude 38° 40´ north; longitude 74° 10´ west; 11 A. M.;
wind west by south; light air. Observed some Petrels (sp.?). Here
an Ovenbird (_Seiurus aurocapillus_) flew aboard and remained until
night. Latitude 39° 2´ north; longitude 73° 53´ west; 7 P. M. Two small
bunches of Northern Phalaropes and one Petrel (sp.?) seen.

May 25. Latitude 40° 17´ north; longitude 73° 23´ west; 6 P. M. Large
flock of Petrels (sp.?) seen.

May 26. 12 M.; light south wind; heavy rain; fog lifting some. Two
Maryland Yellowthroats flew aboard. Latitude 41° 2´ north; longitude
71° 46´ west; 2 P. M. Two Black Hags (_Puffinus fuliginosus?_) seen.

May 28. Latitude 41° 6´ north; longitude 71° 15´ west; 4 P. M. Few
Petrels (sp.?) and Hags (_Puffinus gravis_) observed. Latitude 41° 7´
north; longitude 71° 16´ west; 6 P. M. One small flock of Northern
Phalaropes seen.

May 31. Latitude 41° 9´ north; longitude 71° 9´ west; 8 A. M. Petrels
(sp.?) appear whenever toll-bait for mackerel is thrown. These birds,
as well as preceding Petrels, are called by the sailor on the vessel
"Carey Chickens" or just "Caries."

June 3. Latitude 41° 15´ north; longitude 71´° 2´ west; 4.30 P. M. A
few Petrels ("Caries") observed.


1894.

April 22. Latitude 38° 22´ 30´´ north; longitude 74° 26´ 30´´ west;
2 P. M. Two small flocks of Petrels (sp.?) feeding in a slick. Near
station; latitude 38° 22´ 30´´ north; longitude 74° 26´ 30´´ west; 1.6
knots southeast by south. Several small flocks of Northern Phalaropes,
from eight to thirty birds each, one or two Jaegers and many Loons seen
to-day. Near latitude 38° 19´ north; longitude 74° 23´ west. A flock of
Gannets seen.

April 23. Near latitude 38° 15´ north; longitude 74° 18´ west; dead
calm. Phalaropes have been common this morning in small flocks and
scattering birds, generally flying southward. Latitude 38° 12´ north;
longitude 74° 17´ 30´´ west. One Gray Gannet shot; stomach contained
nothing. Two Northern and two Red Phalaropes shot. Their stomachs
contained copepods and coarse and fine sand, and had a few small
gastropods. Latitude 38° 13´ north; longitude 74° 20´ west. Phalaropes
have been common this morning. A few Arctic Terns observed. Phalaropes
mostly on the wing, but flying in no particular direction.

April 25. Latitude 37° 35´ north; longitude 74° 47´ west. Occasional
flocks of five or six Phalaropes each have been seen to-day.

April 26. Latitude 38° 3´ north; longitude 74° 31´ west; 12 M. Very
few birds thus far to-day. Two Loons heard crying. East northeast; 5.2
knots from latitude 38° 17´ north; longitude 74° 26´ west; 5 P. M. A
small flock of White Gannets seen sitting on the water.

April 27. Latitude 38° 42´ north; longitude 74° 2´ west; 8 A. M.;
temperature of air 53° F.; moderate south southwest breeze. Phalaropes
very common. Latitude 38° 27´ north; longitude 73° 37´ west; 12 M. Some
Phalaropes seen.

April 28. Latitude 38° 24´ 30´´ north; longitude 74° 6´ west; 6 A. M. A
few Phalaropes seen in flocks of three to five.

May 1. Latitude 38° 24´ 30´´ north; longitude 74° 9´ west; 12 M. Quite
a number of scattering Phalaropes have been seen through the last hour.
Six knots southeast by east from latitude 38° 24´ 30´´ north; longitude
74° 9´ west; 1 P. M. Northern and Red Phalaropes quite common but
scattered.

May 2. Latitude 38° 13´ 30´´ north; longitude 73° 33´ west; 12 M. Very
few Phalaropes seen to-day, one Pomarine Jaeger(?). Latitude 38° 9´
30´´ north; longitude 73° 44´ 15´´ west; 4 P. M. Phalaropes scattered
but common.

May 4. Near latitude 38° 29´ north; longitude 74° 47´ 45´´ west.
Numerous large flocks of Phalaropes and large schools of mackerel seen.

May 12. East by south, 4.3 knots from latitude 39° 19´ north;
longitude 72° 49´ 30´´ west; 8 A. M.; gentle northeast by east breeze;
temperature of air 53° F.; clearing; moderate swell. Scattering
Phalaropes seen this morning, also one "Marlinspike" (_Stercorarius
longicaudus?_). West northwest, 1.3 knots from latitude 39° 19'
north; longitude 72° 37´ 30´´ west; 10 A. M.; temperature of air 56°
F.; gentle northeast by north wind; moderate swell. Few scattered
Phalaropes.

May 12. Latitude 39° 21´ 45´´ north; longitude 72° 49´ west;
temperature of air 56° F.; gentle north wind; sea smooth. Observed a
few Phalaropes and one Common Jaeger. Latitude 39° 24´ 30´´ north;
longitude 74° 55´ west; temperature of air 64° F.; calm. Several flocks
of Phalaropes seen flying.

May 13. Latitude 39° 22´ north; longitude 72° 29´ 30´´ west;
temperature of air 54.5° F.; gentle west southwest wind; sea smooth.
Several fair sized flocks of Phalaropes seen this morning.

May 16. Latitude 40° 41´ 30´´ north; longitude 69° 5´ 30´´ west;
temperature of air 57° F.; moderate west breeze; smooth sea. A small
flock of Phalaropes circling about the same spot repeatedly, and
alternately sitting on the water and rising again in quick succession.
Nine Terns (_Sterna hirundo?_) seen "plugging" in the same spot, but
soon flying off to the westward.

May 18. Latitude 45° 6´ 30´´ north; longitude 65° 29´ west; 10 A. M.;
temperature of air 47°; moderate east southeast wind; sky cloudy,
clearing some; sea smooth. Small flocks of Phalaropes seen, very wild.
No birds seen during the afternoon.

May 23. Southeast by south from latitude 44° 11´ 15´´ north; longitude
64° 14´ west; 12 M.; temperature of air 43° F.; moderate east wind;
clear sky; moderate swell. A very large number of Herring Gulls
were seen, two flocks of from 100 to 200 each, also a flock of Red
Phalaropes on the water and Terns (_Sterna paradisea?_) "plugging," and
covering this one place. Latitude 44° 22´ north; longitude 63° 53´
west; 5 P. M.; temperature of air 44° F.; gentle east southeast breeze;
cloudy; sea smooth. "Mackerel Gulls" (_S. paradisea?_) very common this
afternoon. Northeast by east, 3.3 knots from latitude 44° 22´ north;
longitude 63° 53´ west; 6 P. M.; temperature of air 44° F.; gentle east
southeast wind; sky cloudy; sea smooth. About 7 P. M., a large flock of
Phalaropes seen sitting on the water. One (_P. lobatus_) was shot. Tow
net took a lot of "red feed" (copepods) here. Birds contained fragments
of copepods. Nothing found in proventriculum; everything in gizzards
and intestines.

May 23. Latitude 44° 23´ north; longitude 63° 51´ 30´´ west; 7 P. M.;
temperature of air 42.5° F.; light east southeast breeze; cloudy;
sea smooth. Shot five Arctic Terns (_Sterna paradisea_) and three
Phalaropes (_P. lobatus_). Terns had been eating crustacea; contained
fragments. Phalarope had copepods in gizzard. The Terns were very
common to-day. If one is wounded and utters a cry when shot, the others
will hover over it and everyone could be killed.

May 24. Latitude 44° 24´ 45´´ north; longitude 63° 27´ west; 5 P. M.;
temperature of air 44° F.; gentle southeast breeze; sky cloudy; sea
smooth. Surface net took a very few minute copepods in ten minutes.
Surface life is scarce. Terns (_S. paradisea_) have been numerous all
day. They were frequently observed to dive. Phalaropes have been very
common also, but so far away that it was impossible to identify them.
Those we succeeded in shooting were (_P. lobatus_). Red Phalaropes
(_Crymophilus fulcarius_) may have been present, as some looked redder
than others.

May 25. Latitude 45° 0´ 45´´ north; longitude 61° 28´ 30´´ west; 7 P.
M.; temperature of air 46° F.; light west southwest air; sky clearing;
moderate swell. All along a few flocks of Phalaropes have been seen. A
few "Medricks" (_S. paradisea?_) also observed.

May 28. Latitude 44° 49´ 15´´ north; longitude 62° 9´ 30´´ west; 9 A.
M.; temperature of air 45° F.; light north wind; sky cloudy; moderate
swell. Several small flocks of Phalaropes seen sitting on the water.

May 29. Nearly one knot (.7) east northeast from latitude 45° 39´ 30´´
north; longitude 60° 4´ 15´´ west; 2 P. M.; temperature of air 55° F.;
light west northwest air; sky clear; sea smooth. A couple of small
flocks of Phalaropes seen sitting on the water; seemed pretty "tame".

July 9. One knot north by east from latitude 42° 34´ 45´´ north;
longitude 70° 29´ 15´´ west; 2 P. M.; temperature of air 66° F.; sky
overcast; fog; light north by east breeze; sea smooth. Large flock of
Petrels (sp.?) seen sitting on the water or hovering over the surface
in certain localities, probably feeding on something at the surface.

July 17. Latitude 42° 54´ 30´´ north; longitude 70° 18´ 30´´ west; 1
P. M.; temperature of air 72°; light southwest air; overcast; fog; sea
smooth. Observed a large school of large fish ("_Bonito_") followed by
a lot of Petrels (sp.?).

July 30. Latitude 50° 9´ north; longitude 65° 2´ 30´´ west; 9 A. M.;
temperature of air 53° F.; gentle east southeast breeze; overcast; fog;
sea smooth. Very few birds have thus far been seen up here. One or two
Ducks, a few Plover, a few large Gulls, a Loon and a Gannet.

August 5. Latitude 47° 52´ north; longitude 60° 57´ 30´´ west;
"Bird Rock" light bearing west northwest about six miles; 11 A. M.;
temperature of air 61° F.; fresh west by south wind; cloudy; very
choppy. A large number of Gannets seen flying about.

August 18. Southwest by south 1/2 south, 5.5 knots from latitude 44°
59´ 45´´ north; longitude 61° 44´ west; 6 P. M.; temperature of air 62°
F.; stiff west by south wind; sky clearing; sea choppy. Few Medricks
seen.

August 23. Near latitude 43° 11´ 15´´ north; longitude 65° 27´ 15´´
west; 10 A. M.; temperature of air 60° F.; light northwest by west air;
sky clear; moderate sea. Five Phalaropes (_P. lobatus_) seen. Latitude
43° 13´ 30´´ north; longitude 65° 33´ west; 11 A. M.: temperature of
air 55° F.; gentle west by south wind; sky moderate; moderate sea.
Scattering Phalaropes (_P. lobatus_) seen about 10.30 A. M.

September 11. Latitude 43° 11´ 30´´ north; longitude 69° 45´ west; 1 P.
M.; temperature of air 59°; moderate west northwest wind; sky clear;
sea choppy. Four Red and four Northern Phalaropes seen.

    [To be concluded in the September JOURNAL.]




A Pet Cedar Waxwing.

By MRS. DELLA F. WENTWORTH, South Portland.


September 17th, 1908, a young Cedar Waxwing was found helpless and
almost unconscious on the lawn. On examination its left wing seemed
dislocated, and the left leg from the knee to the foot was bent toward
the right foot. We think that the dense fog which prevailed the night
before and that morning may have prevented the bird from seeing the
electric wires overhead and so been the means of the accident.

After being brought into the house he revived, and little by little
recovered the use of his injured leg. After five months the wing still
hangs down nearly touching the perch, though, strange to say, he can
spread it fully, and close it nearly to the dimensions of the well wing
when closed.

Cedric, for so we have named him, can hop from perch to perch of the
canary bird cage and from the floor of the cage to the perches. When
I take him out of the cage on my finger, Cedric will sometimes try to
fly, but succeeds only in flopping down upon the floor, often striking
heavily. Although frequently trying to fly upward, he cannot use his
left wing well enough to raise himself wholly from the floor.

Cedric does not appear to regard his cage as a prison, and, though he
sometimes shows fear of strange inanimate objects, is not afraid of any
person, and will take his favorite tidbits from any offering hand. When
first we offered food we found black cherries and choke cherries were
his choice, but when cherry time had passed he reluctantly accepted
as a substitute dried currants such as are used in cooking. It is
interesting to watch him eat a cherry or currant. Seizing it quickly in
his bill and pointing his bill upward he rolls it over and over in his
mouth, as a juggler revolves a ball in the air, then suddenly one quick
gulp and the tiny ball has disappeared.

Cedric is very fond of live flies, and angleworms cut in half-inch
sections are graciously received, but grasshoppers and beetle-like bugs
are rejected. Cedric seems to like flies best when their wings are
buzzing, and if he is at the farther side of the cage when a fly is
offered him he will jump to the perch near the fly and oftentimes seems
to catch the fly in his bill before his feet have touched the perch. He
comes as near taking the fly "on the fly" as is practicable within the
confines of his cage. In the absence of flies and worms, fresh beef,
veal and lamb, cut in tiny fragments, are eagerly swallowed, but never
in great quantity. Cedric is also fond of fruit, and will eat apple cut
in bits, or scraped fine, and small pieces of orange or banana.

Our little bird protege always knows when he has eaten enough, and when
his needs are satisfied he will leave the most tempting morsels and
resolutely fly or hop to the opposite end of the cage and turn his back
on us as if to say, "I won't even look at it lest I may be tempted"--a
lesson to the featherless bipeds who pride themselves upon their
superior wisdom.

When very hungry, about eighteen flies seem to be a satisfying portion,
though often half as many suffice. A half dozen bits of meat the size
of a green pea, and a less amount of fruit are sufficient. Of course
these meals are frequent, six or eight a day, while he always has
access to the dried currants which we keep in his food dish, and which
are washed and soaked before putting in the dish. If the currants are
too dry, he will roll them about in his bill and toss them scornfully
over his shoulder. Any food which we offer him that he does not want
is promptly thrown down. We tried him on cedar cones and the berries
of the ground juniper, but he would have none of them. The berries of
the bush honeysuckle he ate until we got him cherries, when he utterly
refused the honeysuckle berries, and threw them out of his dish. Seeds
and sand he will not notice, but pecks regularly at the cuttlefish in
his cage. When hungry he announces it in shrill staccato whistles, but
when his hunger is satisfied, he will seek an upper perch and preen his
feathers, and often sing to us in a soft, sweet whistle, which seems
full of love, confidence and content, though it may have a shade of
vague regret.

On hearing our footsteps after a period of solitude, we are greeted
with a welcoming whistle, which is very delightful. This, and the more
strident tones of our Poll Parrot, convince us that "they miss us at
home."

At night, though in the full glare of the electric light, Cedric is
ready to settle down to quiet, and when asked if he is ready to go to
bed, he will flutter all his feathers and snuggle up in a corner, when
we cover the cage with a paper and bid him "good night." If offered
food at night he snaps his bill at us and makes an indescribable little
querulous sound in his throat and will peck at our fingers if we
continue to annoy him.

The cage is placed on the end of the piano and often when we play
and sing, Cedric sits very still and accompanies us with his soft,
whispering trill.

Every morning Cedric has his bath in the big bath tub, where he is
sprinkled with cold water from a bath sprinkler. He spreads his
feathers and prances about apparently in great delight. He always
seems sorry when his bath is ended. Notwithstanding his daily bath, he
frequently goes through the motions of taking a second bath, this time
in his drink dish, though no water gets farther than his eyes.

Cedric has been moulting for two months or more. When found his breast
was whitish, mottled with dark spots, like the breast of a thrush. He
had no red spots on his wings and was not the beautiful purplish fawn
color which is now showing on back and crest and breast, as the new
feathers make their appearance. Now very few mottled feathers remain
on his breast, which is nearly covered with the pretty fawn-colored
feathers. The feathers of the belly are light lemon color. The
lemon-tipped tail feathers have come out, one or two at a time, and are
now nearly all new. The vivid black forehead and chin are new, but the
crest is in such a state of pinfeatherdom that one would hardly think
our little friend had any crest to speak of. Long and anxiously have we
looked forward to the day when the little red tips would appear on the
wings, and February 10th the first one was observed on the lame wing.
It is salmon colored, rather than the vivid red of sealing wax, as
yet, but we are watching closely for all the changes as they come, and
shall hope soon to see our pet arrayed in the full insignia of the very
daintiest groomed of all the distinguished Cedar Waxwings.

Our great regret is that we cannot cure him and set him free with his
kind. It is pathetic to hear him chirp at his own image in the mirror,
and for some time he has been tearing paper in his cage and trying to
make string or paper stay upon his perch, apparently as the foundation
of his nest. Much as we love him, we would gladly set him free could
he but hold his own in the bird world and escape his enemies. Could
we but find someone who could set his wing so that he could fly among
his kind, we would be gladly content with only the memory of a brave,
patient, trusting, dainty, delightful friend.




The Bohemian Waxwing in Maine.

By ORA W. KNIGHT, Bangor.


About the first of March the writer noticed an item in the _Bangor
Commercial_ to the effect that Mr. Clark had seen large flocks of the
Northern Waxwing at Lubec during the past winter, but paid no further
attention to the event, knowing that Mr. Clark would doubtless record
the matter in proper shape in a more scientific medium in due season.

On March 9th, Dr. W. H. Simmons, of Bangor, called me up on the
telephone and said he wished to tell me about the flock of Bohemian
Waxwings which he had seen daily near his home since the middle of
February. He stated that there was a good sized flock of the birds,
and that they had been feeding daily on the fruit of a mountain ash
tree which grew beside a window of his home, where he could look down
on them. The birds had been coming for some time before he paid any
especial attention to them, thinking that they were doubtless Pine
Grosbeaks, until he happened to notice that they all had crests, which
he knew was not a fact with the Grosbeaks. He then examined the birds
critically and identified them as Bohemian Waxwings by their having
white wing bars, yellow tips to their tail feathers, and by their
prominent crests. Dr. Simmons also states that in February, 1908, a
flock of birds of the same size were daily in the habit of visiting the
same locality, but at that time he took no particular notice of them,
though he is inclined to believe that they were of the present species.

March 11th, the writer and Mr. Winch visited the locality for the
purpose of personally seeing the birds. They were not about Dr.
Simmons' premises, but he was able to give us an idea of the general
route they pursued, so that finally we found the flock feeding on
rotten crab apples in an orchard several blocks away. Yes, there is
no question as to their identity, as they were positively Bohemian
Waxwings. They were busily engaged in eating the rotten apples,
sometimes eating the pulp itself, at other times pecking the apple to
pieces and eating the seeds, which they swallowed without shelling out
the meat as do the Pine Grosbeaks.

Now and then the birds would fly from the tree in which they were
feeding to a neighboring tree, uttering low lisping notes and
whistlings which sounded very appreciably different in character from
the notes of the Cedar birds.

They were very tame, so that I was able to get up within fifteen feet
of them and secured six exposures of them with my pocket kodak. As if
to show their kindly and obliging nature, they waited patiently until I
was through taking photographs, and then at a signal the whole flock
flew away in a compact bunch. Later in the day Mr. Winch secured one at
the same locality, to which they returned.

From Dr. Simmons I was able to learn somewhat of their feeding habits.
They did not seem to eat the pulp of the mountain ash berries but
delved into the berry to obtain the seed while the pulp was dropped on
the snow beneath. They seem to be more or less regular in their feeding
habits, frequenting certain localities in a given route or circuit
through the immediate neighborhood for a distance of a dozen blocks or
so.

One of the teachers at the neighboring grammar school, who has
aspirations to be somewhat of an ornithologist, had an item printed
in the _Bangor Commercial_ to the effect that the Cedar Waxwings had
been wintering in the immediate neighborhood. Dr. Simmons saw this
item in print and immediately called me up on the telephone to call
my attention to the error, thus happily resulting in giving me much
valuable information and the pleasure of seeing the birds as well.

It is well on to twenty years ago, when the writer was a high school
boy, just beginning his scientific career, that the Bohemian Waxwings
last visited this locality. In those early days Bohemian Waxwings and
other northern birds used to visit us rather more frequently than they
do now, as we used to see them every three or four years, but now that
twenty years has elapsed from their last call to the present visit it
is indeed a pleasure to be able to see them once more.

Practically all our winter birds seem to come in fewer numbers and less
frequently and regularly than formerly, though even in those early days
such eccentric creatures as the Bohemian Waxwings, Crossbills, and to a
lesser extent the Pine Grosbeaks, could never be depended on.

Formerly we always found the Crossbills in winter, not at any other
season, while now about Bangor both species of Crossbill occur more
commonly and regularly as summer birds in May, June, July and August.




Birds of the Boston Public Garden.

    BIRDS OF THE BOSTON PUBLIC GARDEN. A Study in Migration. By
    Horace Winslow Wright, with an Introduction by Bradford Torrey,
    and illustrations. 238 pages. $1.00 net. Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
    Boston and New York.


THE JOURNAL has no hesitation in designating this volume as one of
the most satisfactory local lists of birds ever published. For nine
years the author has been a constant student of the migration of
birds at the Boston Public Garden, adjoining Boston Common. Frequent
excursions through that delightful locality in the early morning at
the season when the birds are traveling northward or southward have
made Mr. Wright perfectly familiar with the conditions which govern
their arrival and departure. The data which he gives are valuable for
all New England students, as well as a service beyond estimate for the
young people who are making their first observations in that locality.
A description of the Public Garden and the vegetation it contains
is of exceeding interest. The illustrations are excellent half-tone
engravings of the trees which attract different rare species of birds
and the locations which they love. Particulars of the noteworthy
features of the migrations for a series of years are given, both from
the personal observations of the author and from the added testimony of
other reliable observers.

More than three-fourths of the volume is devoted to an annotated list
of the birds of the Boston Public Garden and incidentally of the
Common, in migration, 1900-1908. This list is exhaustive and authority
for numerous records and dates is freely given. An examination of
the list is of unusual interest on account of its clearness and
completeness, as well as the systematic order in which it is arranged.
Many birds which one would expect to visit the Public Garden frequently
in migration are noted as very rare. On the other hand, birds often are
recorded as common which one would not expect to find their way to that
locality. The book, as a whole, is of great value to the bird student,
and it is so well done that it is worth a place in the library of any
ornithologist.

  W. H. B.




The Ornithological Magazines.


THE AUK.--The _Auk_ for April, 1909, is an unusually interesting
number. It contains "The Position of Birds' Feet in Flight," by
Charles W. Townsend, M. D.; "Ornithological Miscellany from Audubon
Wardens," by B. S. Bowdish; "Notes on the Summer Birds of Northern
Georgia," by Arthur H. Howell; "The Training of Wild Birds as a Means
of Studying Their Movements," by Leon J. Cole; "A List of the Birds
of Western South Dakota," by Stephen S. Vischer; "Barrow's Golden-eye
in Massachusetts," by William Brewster; "The Habitat Groups of North
American Birds in the American Museum of Natural History," by J. A.
Allen; "Something More about Black Ducks," by William Brewster, and
"New Records and Important Range Extensions of Colorado Birds," by
Merrit Cary. Besides these general articles there are many valuable
notes of birds and bird literature.


THE CONDOR.--The _Condor_ for March-April, 1909, has articles on
Mearns Quail, Dusky Poor-will, California Black Rail, Thrashers, of
Arizona, Birds of Southern Mexico, and the usual number of notes. In
an interesting article Jonathan Dwight, Jr., M. D., of New York, makes
a plea for retaining the common names of birds and for stability in
vernacular appellations.


THE WILSON BULLETIN.--The _Wilson Bulletin_, for March, 1909, includes
an index to the preceding volume. There are articles and notes on the
birds of the Washington coast, American Barn Owl, Yellow-breasted Chat,
Wood Thrush, Robin, Song Sparrow, Warblers of Wayne County, Michigan,
and others. There is a long article on Alexander Wilson by Frank L.
Burns.


CASSINIA.--_Cassinia_, issued in March, 1908, contains the proceedings
of the Delaware Valley Ornithological Club of Philadelphia. There
are articles of permanent value on the birds of Pennsylvania and New
Jersey. It is an interesting and valuable publication, well printed and
adequately illustrated.


THE PURPLE MARTIN AND HOUSES FOR ITS SUMMER HOME.--This pamphlet is
Gleanings No. 5, by J. Warren Jacobs, of Waynesburg, Pa. It is an
article reprinted from the publications of the Pennsylvania State Board
of Agriculture. It contains all the information that anyone could
desire about Martin houses, and how to obtain them or build them. There
are also full suggestions for attracting the birds to the houses after
they are erected. For sale by the author.




  The Journal

  of the

  Maine Ornithological Society

  A Quarterly Magazine Devoted to the Study and Protection of Birds

  Vol. XI      Published June 1, 1909      No. 2

  SUBSCRIPTION RATES: $1.00 a year; 25 cents a copy


OFFICERS OF THE MAINE ORNITHOLOGICAL SOCIETY

  Pres., DR. HENRY H. BROCK, Portland
  Vice-Pres., J. MERTON SWAIN, Farmington
  Sec.-Treas., DANA W. SWEET, Philips
  Councillors, DR. WM. C. KENDALL, Freeport
               WALTER H. RICH, Portland
  W. H. BROWNSON, Portland Editor
  LOUIS E. LEGGE, Portland Associate Editor


The JOURNAL prints in this issue the first instalment of an interesting
series of notes of birds at sea, by Dr. William C. Kendall, Scientific
Assistant U. S. Bureau of Fisheries, gathered in 1891, 1894 and 1895
on the United States Fish Commission Schooner Grampus, the cruises
extending from the coast of Virginia to the Gulf of St. Lawrence and
even to southern Labrador. The notes for 1891 and 1894 are here printed
and those made in 1895 will be published in the September JOURNAL. We
are under obligation to Dr. Kendall for this valuable contribution.

Mr. Dana W. Sweet, the new Secretary and Treasurer of the Maine
Ornithological Society, has for some years compiled, in an able
manner, the migration reports sent to him by members of the Society.
In addition to his duties as Secretary and Treasurer, Mr. Sweet will
continue to edit the migration reports, and this will be eminently
satisfactory to all members.

The attempt to introduce the Hungarian Partridge into Cumberland County
will be watched with considerable interest, to see whether the birds
liberated will take kindly to their new habitat. In this issue Mr.
Walter H. Rich writes of the circumstances attending the introduction
of the bird and contributes an excellent original portrait, drawn from
life.

During the winter of 1908-1909 the Bohemian Waxwing appears to have
been seen by a number of reliable observers, mostly in Eastern Maine.
Reports of its occurrence continue to come in, so that it is sure that
the region visited by the bird was quite extensive.

All subscribers to THE JOURNAL, who have not paid for the year 1909,
are requested to send their dollars as soon as convenient. The money
is needed to pay the current expenses of publishing THE JOURNAL, the
membership dues, which should be paid to the Treasurer, not being
sufficient for that purpose. Subscribers, as heretofore, should remit
to the editor.

Attention is again called to the necessity of having a good department
of notes, and this can only be accomplished when the members make
frequent and generous contributions. The new associate member, Mr.
Louis E. Legge, has charge of this feature of the magazine, and under
his direction there is no doubt that it will be a credit to the
Society. It is hoped that members will not fail to respond to Mr.
Legge's request for material to make a good showing.

Members who have copies of Vol. 7, No. 1, March, 1905, Vol. 8, No. 1,
March, 1906, or Vol. 9, No. 4, December, 1907, and who do not care
to preserve them for binding, will do a favor by sending them to the
editor. The file is nearly exhausted for those issues of THE JOURNAL,
and there are frequent calls for complete sets from libraries in
different parts of the country. Those who have copies issued previous
to 1905 should preserve them carefully and send them to the editor
unless they are intended for binding. There are many of the early
issues of THE JOURNAL which are now lacking, and it is getting to be
difficult to make up a complete set.

       *       *       *       *       *

LINCOLN'S SPARROW AND MOURNING WARBLER IN PORTLAND, MAINE.--On May
30, 1909, I received as one of the victims of a plate glass window on
Bowdoin St., Portland, a Lincoln's Sparrow (_Melospiza Lincolnii_), a
male in good plumage. This is apparently the fifth recorded specimen
for the vicinity of Portland. On June 1, 1909, from the same source, an
adult male Mourning Warbler (_Geothlypis philadelphia_). This appears
to be the third recorded specimen for the vicinity of Portland. The
other two specimens are recorded by Mr. N. C. Brown, May 31, 1876,
Deering, _Brown Bull. Nutt. Orn. Cl._, Vol. I, p. 95, and May 30,
1868, Cape Elizabeth, Me., _Proc. Part. Lac., N. H._, Vol. II, p. 1.
Both birds are preserved and in my possession.--_Miss Helen M. Lewis,
Portland, Maine._

THE WHITE-CROWNED SPARROW.--After walking a number of miles and
visiting several places in a vain search for the White-crowned Sparrow,
I gave up all hope of finding it this spring, but on May 26th I was so
fortunate as to see a fine specimen of the male bird. He was perched on
a post which stands at the edge of a tract of swampy land and appeared
to be resting. I called the attention of my companion to him, and as he
did not appear to object to our presence we took a long look at him.
Should any person in this part of the state see this most interesting
bird at a later date, I should be very glad to know it.--_Sara C.
Eastman. Portland, Maine._




Bird Notes.

Notes and observations upon bird life within our State are earnestly
desired from all our readers for publication in this column, and should
be sent to Louis E. Legge, 22 Dow street, Portland, Maine.


We note with much satisfaction the increasing frequency with which the
members of our society report to this JOURNAL their ornithological
observations. This is an important part of our duties, one to another,
and should be shared in by all interested in bird life. The JOURNAL'S
columns are always open to contributors of items of general interest
relating to Maine birds, and we trust our members will, though this
medium, disseminate such knowledge as they personally possess.


BIRDS AT GRAND MANAN.--Allan L. Moses sends from Grand Manan a list
of birds seen there in March, April and the early part of May. Among
the most interesting notes are a thousand Northern Phalaropes, a
large flight of Sharp-shinned Hawks April 6th, Sparrow Hawks abundant
on the same day, a Sora Rail heard on April 21st, a large flight of
Ruby-crowned Kinglets from April 23rd to 25th. Mr. Moses reports on
March 6th a Wilson's Phalarope, the only time he has seen it there. He
records for the first time on the island an Ipswich Sparrow on March
26th. A Little Blue Heron was seen April 17th, this being the fourth
time it has been recorded at Grand Manan. Brunnich's Murre was seen
March 31st, Dovekie May 4th, Pigeon Hawks common after May 7th, Yellow
Palm Warblers common after April 14th, Myrtle Warblers common after
April 17th, Redpoll April 22nd, American Pipit May 11th.--_Louis E.
Legge, Portland._


MOURNING DOVES.--March 19th, I discovered a pair of Mourning Doves
in the old Deering Golf Links, near the junction of Falmouth Street
and Deering Avenue. My attention was first called to them by their
size, and their peculiar movement on the ground. They were feeding
quite close together, and finally I succeeded in making them take
wing, when I at once discovered what variety of birds they were by
the heart-shaped tail and the white feathers on each side. From their
action on the wing, I should imagine that they were a pair, male
and female. Possibly these birds are not rare, but I never recalled
seeing but one other specimen, which I shot eleven years ago, late in
October.--_Silas B. Adams, Portland._


BOHEMIAN WAXWINGS IN BANGOR.--The flock of Bohemian Waxwings, which
has been seen about the streets of Bangor since early in February, had
not left us March 30th, 1909. I had not seen them until that date,
although I had made many efforts to do so. I was walking down Court
Street, near my own home, when I heard the note which I knew to be a
Waxwing note, but enough different from that of the Cedar bird so that
I at once guessed that I was at last to see our own rare visitors. I
discovered a good sized flock among some apple trees in a neighbor's
yard. For a good half hour I watched the birds at close quarters. They
were busy with the old fruit on the trees and flying back and forth to
the ground, the snow under the trees often being thickly dotted with
them. They did not seem to mind at all my close proximity, neither
did they mind some chattering English Sparrows who came around to see
what was going on. But the strident note of a crow seemed to disturb
their nerves somewhat. At his near call they would rise and fly off a
short distance, but would soon return again to the same trees. A couple
of White-breasted Nuthatches and a Chickadee, seemed to be on very
friendly terms of companionship with them. I had ample opportunity to
observe all the distinguishing features of the Bohemian Waxwing, the
shape of the crest, the white on the wings, the chestnut coloring of
under tail coverts and forehead, which in the sunlight looked almost a
rich orange. I think I never enjoyed a more interesting and beautiful
bird sight.--_Bertha L. Brown, Bangor._


PHILLIPS BIRD NOTES.--I had never been able to find the Fox Sparrow in
spring until last year. This spring I have found this species common,
and most of the birds that I saw were singing. The song, when heard a
little distance away, impressed me as being remarkably similar to that
of the White-crowned Sparrow. I saw one White-crowned May 11th, two May
16th, and two the 17th. They were all in song. May 5th, I came upon a
flock of nine Pipits. This is my earliest record. The same day I saw a
large compact flock of Redpolls. I estimated the number to be between
100 and 200. The Sparrow Hawks have been fairly common this spring.
With me this is a rare species. Up to date, the present month seems to
have been most unfavorable for the observation of Warblers. They are
not inclined to sing much, owing to the cold, backward weather. A few
have arrived at the usual time, but it takes perseverance and sharp
eyes to find them.--_Dana W. Sweet, Phillips._


FOX SPARROWS SING IN BANGOR.--The 2nd of April I was delighted to hear
again the inspiring song of the Fox Sparrow. I rushed out of doors
with my glasses, and sure enough the little fellow was perched on a
high branch of a young birch tree in our garden, his cinnamon back
gleaming in the sunlight, and his joyous notes fairly crowding from
his bursting little throat. This is the earliest spring record that I
have of the Fox Sparrow. I first learned to know the song five years
ago. Since then, every spring, numbers of the birds have visited our
grounds, scratching among the leaves on the hillside, and singing
exuberantly in the trees, generally staying with us about ten days or
two weeks in April. As yet my little songster seems to be alone, but I
hope soon to welcome his friends. Some bird books say the Fox Sparrow
sings only on his northern breeding grounds; but I and several of my
bird-lover friends know very well that of late years, at least, they
sing around Bangor. In our own garden, and also in another garden
somewhat similarly situated in another part of the city, we enjoy their
most beautiful ringing song every April.--_Bertha L. Brown, Bangor._


MORE BOHEMIAN WAXWINGS.--Mrs. Elizabeth H. Marks, of Yarmouth, writes
that Miss Ellen F. Paine, of Bangor, reports a flock of Bohemian
Waxwings at Bangor, the week previous to March 7th. The birds were
positively identified--_W. H. Brownson, Portland._


KILLDEER PLOVER.--Sunday, April 4th, while out for a walk looking for
birds, I was very much gratified to see a Killdeer Plover. It was in
fine plumage and was a beautiful bird.--_H. W. Jewell, Farmington._


SPOTTED SANDPIPER LIGHTS IN BUSHES.--While out looking for birds back
of the depot here at Farmington, I saw a Spotted Sandpiper fly and
light on a bush which hung out over the water. They have done this
before when I have been at the same place. There is a small creek back
of the depot and a sewer runs into it from the village. The Sandpipers
were here picking up bugs and worms from the mud on the banks of the
creek.--_H. W. Jewell, Farmington._


AN ALBINISTIC HERMIT THRUSH.--On the morning of May 17th, 1909, the
writer saw an albinistic Hermit Thrush at Westbrook, Me. The bird was
not captured. The entire head and upper part of the neck and throat
appeared to be white and immaculate, and the large spots of the breast
were resumed below the albinistic portion, their irregular upper border
showing the irregular termination of albinistic portion. The unusual
number of Hermit Thrushes seen that morning made it appear that a
movement was in progress. The bird has not been seen since. Should any
one see the bird, it is to be hoped that it may be reported through
these pages.--_Arthur H. Norton, Portland._


A ROBIN'S STRANGE NESTING PLACE.--I found a year or two ago what
seemed to me to be an interesting incident, which was in the shape of
a Robin's nest built on a ledge, the ledge being on a level with the
surrounding land. A small bush gave protection from the blazing rays of
the sun. The nest was six feet from the track (Sandy River Railroad),
where four passenger trains passed, also several freight trains each
day, but did not disturb the bird in the least.--_H. W. Jewell,
Farmington._


NOTES FROM FRANKLIN CO.--I saw a Wood Thrush near Farmington village,
May 21st. I had visited the same place the morning before without
hearing it. I saw another May 24th, near my home in Avon. May 23d, I
saw a Philadelphia Vireo. It was singing in a clump of small trees on a
bank in a field. The same day I saw a Veery with a pure white place on
its upper parts. It seemed to be on the wing near the rump, about the
width of a feather, and one-half to three-fourths inches long.--_Dana
W. Sweet, Phillips._


LATE MYRTLE WARBLERS.--On account of illness I have been unable to
watch the migration of birds except from the piazza of my cottage in
South Portland. As late as May 22nd, a considerable flock of Myrtle
Warblers frequented the small gray birch trees which abound here. There
were from twenty-five to forty individuals, in all grades of plumage.
The adult males are very brilliant in slaty blue, black and yellow.
This date seems to me to be quite late for so many of these birds to be
in this section of the state, as they rarely nest here. A few Yellow
Palm Warblers are with the Myrtles, and it is late for them to be so
far south. Brown Thrashers, Catbirds, Baltimore Orioles and Yellow
Warblers are quite numerous around the cottage. A large flock of Tree
Swallows fly around the field all day, seeking insects in the air, but
often settling down among the bayberry bushes and varying their early
fare with the waxy berries.--_W. H. Brownson, Portland._


HIGHLAND LAKE MIGRANTS.--While I have not been out at all this spring,
as is my custom, to watch for the migrants, I have seen a few on
the way to my camp at Highland Lake, as noted below; March 27th, 1
Bluebird; April 11th, 5 Phoebes, 1 Pine Warbler; April 19th, 2 Yellow
Palm Warblers; April 19th, 2 Vesper Sparrows; April 27th, 3 Spotted
Sandpipers; May 2nd, Black-throated Green Warbler, Nashville Warbler,
Barn Swallow, Blue-headed Vireo; May 9th, Kingfisher; May 15th,
Catbird; May 16th, Ovenbird, Redstart, Chestnut-sided Warbler.

Mr. Fred Frost reports seeing a flock of 42 Canada Geese going over the
Western Promenade March 25th.

Mr. Harry Hanson reports two Song Sparrows wintering near and about
Deering Oaks. The pair were observed at various times during November,
December and January--_Louis E. Legge, Portland._




The Warblers of North America

By FRANK M. CHAPMAN.


With 24 full-page colored plates illustrating male, female and young
of all species, and 8 full-page plates of nests and eggs. Large 8vo.
Cloth, $2.90.

  "The Warbler Book" and Chapman's
    Color Key, or Reed's
    North American Birds' Eggs,             $4.80

  "The Warbler Book" and Bird-Lore,
    full year,                               3.60

  Chapman's Handbook Birds Ea.
    N. Am., cloth, $2.25; leather,           2.60

  Coues's Key, last ed., 2 vols., cloth,    11.00

  Bird Studies with a Camera, Chapman,       1.50

  Two Bird Lovers in Mexico, Beede,          2.85

  Wild Wings, Job,                           2.85

  Bird Houses, Dugmore,                      1.82

  With the Birds in Maine, Miller,           1.00


ALL SENT POSTPAID.

Let me quote you on any book or magazine published. My lists are free
for the asking.

BIRD GLASSES, fine pair, in case with strap, $5.00, prepaid.

  BENJAMIN HOAG,
  STEPHENTOWN, NEW YORK.




WANTED!

Ornithological Books

on American or Foreign Birds and Eggs.


Offer fine list of choice sets, among them 7^1_{2}; 21^2_{1}; 82^1^{1};
211 B^1_{11}; 230^1_{4}; 347 A^1_{3}; 348^1_{4}; 349^1_{2}; 356^1_{4};
424^1_{3}; 486^1_{8}; 663^1_{4}; 645 A^1_{5}; 715^1_{6}; 754^1;
763^1_{3}. 200 others.

  CHAS. S. THOMPSON
  Box 214
  BUENA VISTA, COLORADO




  Bird-Lore

  is now publishing a series of plates by

  _Louis Agassiz Fuertes
  and Bruce Horsfall_

  ILLUSTRATING

  The Flycatchers of North America

  IN COLOR

  20 Cents a Copy $1.00 a Year

  THE MACMILLAN CO.,

  FIFTH AVE.,

  New York City




WANTED.


Members of the Maine Ornithological Society who have copies of THE
JOURNAL of Vol. 7, No. 1, March, 1905, Vol. 8, No. 1, March, 1906, or
Vol. 9, No. 4, December, 1907, and who do not care to preserve them for
binding, will confer a favor by sending them to the Associate editor of
THE JOURNAL, Louis E. Legge, 22 Dow Street, Portland, Maine. The file
is nearly exhausted for those issues and there are frequent calls for
complete sets from libraries and individuals in different parts of the
country.




_..Standard Books on Birds.._

FLOWERS, INSECTS, FISHES

_and all Branches of Nature_....


We can furnish on orders received by mail any nature book that you may
want at a price that will be satisfactory to you. We have all the


STANDARD BIRD BOOKS

published, and can supply them promptly. Write us for information about
anything you have in mind of this description, and we will reply at
once. When you are in Portland call and see what we have on our shelves.

Following is a partial list of the bird books we have in stock and can
furnish upon order:

  Camps and Cruises of an Ornithologist.                  _Frank M. Chapman_

  Warblers of North America.                              _Frank M. Chapman_

  Birds of Maine.                                            _Ora W. Knight_

  Baby Bird Finder. Volume 1 and 2.      _H. E. Richards and E. G. Cummings_

  Feathered Game of the Northeast.                          _Walter H. Rich_

  Key to North American Birds, 2 vols.                   _Dr. Elliott Coues_

  Handbook of Birds Eastern North America.                _Frank M. Chapman_

  Color Key to North American Birds.                         _F. M. Chapman_

  Bird-Life.                                                 _F. M. Chapman_

  Bird-Studies with a Camera.                                      _Chapman_

  Handbook of Birds of the Western United
    States.                                        _Florence Merriam Bailey_

  North American Birds' Eggs.                              _Chester A. Reed_

  A Guide to the Birds of New England
    and Eastern New York.                                    _Ralph Hoffman_

  Nests and Eggs of North American Birds.                     _Oliver Davie_

  Birds of the Rockies.                                             _Keyser_

  The Warblers of North America.                          _Frank M. Chapman_

  Two Bird-Lovers in Mexico. Lavishly
    illustrated.                                          _C. William Beebe_

  Bird Neighbors.                                          _Neltje Blanchan_

  Birds That Hunt and Are Hunted.                          _Neltje Blanchan_

  How to Attract the Birds.                                       _Blanchan_

  Bird Homes.                                                      _Dugmore_

  Home Life of Wild Birds.                                   _F. H. Herrick_

  Field Book of Wild Birds and Their
    Music.                                                   _F. S. Mathews_

  Birdcraft.                                           _Mabel Osgood Wright_

  Birds of Village and Field.                          _Florence A. Merriam_

  A-Birding on a Bronco.                                           _Merriam_

  Birds through an Opera-Glass.                                    _Merriam_

  With the Birds in Maine.                             _Olive Thorne Miller_

  The First Book of Birds.                                          _Miller_

  The Second Book of Birds.                                         _Miller_

  Upon the Tree-Tops. A Bird-Lover in
    the West. Little Brothers of the Air.
    Bird-Ways. In Nesting Time.                                     _Miller_

  Bird Portraits.                                    _Ernest Thompson-Seton_

  "Every Bird."                                                       _Howe_

  Fowls of the Air.                                                   _Long_

  Our Common Birds and Know Them.                                     _Grant_

  Field Key to the Land Birds.                                      _Knobel_

  Song Birds and Water Fowl. Parkhurst

  Wake-Robin. Winter Sunshine. Birds
    and Poets. Locusts and Wild Honey.
    Pepacton and Other Sketches. Fresh
    Fields. Signs and Seasons. Riverby.                     _John Burroughs_

  Everyday Birds.                                          _Bradford Torrey_

  Wild Wings.                                               _Herbert K. Job_

  The Land-Birds and Game-Birds of New
    England.                                                _Henry D. Minot_
    Third edition edited by                               _William Brewster_

  Wild Fowl of North America.                         _Daniel Giraud Elliot_

  North American Shore Birds.                                       _Elliot_

  Gallinaceous Game Birds of North America.                         _Elliot_

  Birds of the United States and Canada.                    _Thomas Nuttall_
    Revised and annotated, with additions
    by                                                _Montague Chamberlain_


_Ornithologists will always be welcome_

at our store, and we shall be pleased to give all particulars about
anything in the book line that may be desired. Our store is in Monument
Square, where all the electric car lines center, and easily reached by
all visitors to the city.

  LORING, SHORT & HARMON,
  PORTLAND, MAINE.


[Transcriber’s Note:

Obvious printer errors corrected silently.

Inconsistent spelling and hyphenation are as in the original.]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE JOURNAL OF THE MAINE ORNITHOLOGICAL SOCIETY, VOL. XI. NO. 2 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


