The Project Gutenberg eBook of Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and Autumn of 1883. Fifth Report
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Report on the Migration of Birds in the Spring and Autumn of 1883. Fifth Report

Author: J. A. Harvie-Brown
        Richard Manliffe Barrington
        John Cordeaux
        Alexander Goodman More


        
Release date: June 13, 2021 [eBook #65609]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/65609

Credits: Tom Cosmas compiled from materials made freely available on The Internet Archive and placed in the Public Domain.


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS IN THE SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1883. FIFTH REPORT ***

Transcriber Note

Text emphasis denoted as _Italics_ and =Bold=.




                                REPORT

                                ON THE

                         =MIGRATION OF BIRDS=

                                IN THE

                      SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1883.


                                  BY

               Mr. J. A. HARVIE BROWN, Mr. J. CORDEAUX,
               Mr. R. M. BARRINGTON, and Mr. A. G. MORE.



                            =FIFTH REPORT.=


  "A good practical naturalist must be a good observer; and how many
  qualities are required to make up a good observer! Attention,
  patience, quickness to seize separate facts, discrimination to keep
  them unconfused, readiness to combine them, and rapidity and yet
  slowness of induction; above all, perfect fidelity, which can be
  seduced neither by the enticements of a favourite theory nor by
  the temptation to see a little more than actually happens in some
  passing drama."--_Essays, Bishop Wilberforce, Vol. I._


                                LONDON:

           PRINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN & CO., 54, HATTON GARDEN.

                                 1884.




PREFACE.


The following Report contains a summary of investigations of the
Committee re-appointed by the British Association for the Advancement
of Science, at Southport, in 1883, to consist of Professor Newton, Mr.
J. A. Harvie Brown, Mr. John Cordeaux, Mr. W. Eagle Clarke, Mr. R. M.
Barrington, and Mr. A. G. More, for the purpose of obtaining (with
the consent of the Master and Elder Brethren of the Trinity House,
the Commissioners of Northern Lights, and the Commissioners of Irish
Lights) observations on the Migration of Birds at Lighthouses and
Lightships, and of reporting on the same at Montreal, Canada, in 1884.
Mr. Cordeaux to be the Secretary.

The returns relating to Scotland have been arranged by Mr. J. A. Harvie
Brown; for the East Coast of England, by Mr. Cordeaux; and those for
the Coasts of Ireland, by Mr. R. M. Barrington and Mr. A. G. More.
No return has been received by the Committee from the West Coast of
England and the Isle of Man.




CONTENTS.


                                      PAGE

  East Coast of Scotland                 1

  East Coast of England                 33

  West Coast of Scotland                63

  Coasts of Ireland                     82


FIFTH REPORT

ON

THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS

IN THE

SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1883.


  "We had a succession of black nights going up the river, and it was
  observable that whenever we landed and suddenly inundated the trees
  with the intense sun-burst of the Electric Light, a certain curious
  effect was always produced: hundreds of birds flocked instantly out
  from the masses of shining green foliage, and went careering hither
  and thither through the white rays, and often a song bird turned
  up and fell to singing. We judged that they mistook this superb
  artificial day for the genuine article."--Mark Twain, in '_Life on
  the Mississippi_,' p. 452.

                        "Yea, even the fowl--
    That through the polar summer months could see
    A beauty in Spitzbergen's naked isles,
    Or on the drifted icebergs seek a home--
    Even they had fled, on southern wing, in search
    Of less inclement shores."--_The Fowler._




EAST COAST OF SCOTLAND, &c.


From Skykkesholm, in Iceland, comes our first return from that country
since the commencement of our work. M. Thorlacius, to whom we are
indebted for this return, writes as follows:--"As this list cannot
nearly comprise all the Icelandic birds of passage, of which especially
the sea-birds are wanting, I shall complete this by next mail, and send
you the continuation along with a complete list of the appearances of
birds of passage in the present year (1883). The dates quoted opposite
each species is the day on which they were first observed here. The
approximate date of departure will be given later."

The following notes are copied direct from M. Thorlacius' schedule, and
are most useful to the Committee, serving as they do as finger-posts
on the route of migration, indicating the important dates of arrival
at their breeding-quarters of Icelandic summer migrants. When M.
Thorlacius sends his autumn departures of migrants and the other good
things he so kindly promises us, we will have useful standpoints,
the spaces between which can be more easily filled in when these are
fixed:--

Skykkesholm, Iceland, 1882, lat. 65° 4′ N.; long. 22° 43′ W.

  April 7th, _Turdus iliacus_, S., very fresh; rain.
  May 8th, _Saxicola œnanthe_, S.E., light air; clear.
  April 24th, _Motacilla alba_, N.E., stormy; clear.
  May 24th, _Anthus pratensis_, N.E., storm; light showers.
  April 25th, _Scolopax gallinago_, N.E., storm; light showers.
  April 19th, _Totanus calidris,_ E., very fresh; dry.
  May 11th, _Numenius phæopus_, N.E., very fresh; light showers.
  April 17th, _Charadrius pluvialis_, N.E., very fresh; clear.
  April 19th, _Tringa alpina_, N.E., very fresh; clear.
  May 3rd, _T. cinerea_, E., blowing hard; clear.
  April 29th, _Strepsilas collaris_, N.E., storm; snow showers.
  April 26th, _Tringa hiaticula_, N.E., storm; dry.
  May 23rd, _Phalaropus cinerea_, N.E., blowing hard; clear.
  May 24th, _P. platyrhincha_, N.E., storm; snow showers.
  April 9th, _Falco cæsius_, N.E., very fresh; rain.
  April 9th, _Limosa melanura_, N.E., very fresh; rain.
  April 9th, _Hæmatopus ostralegus_, N.E., very fresh; rain.
  March 30th, _H. ostralegus._
  April 30th, _Fringilla linaria_, N.E. storm, cloudy; rain.
  April 30th, _Loxia serinus_, N.E. storm, cloudy; rain.
  March 15th, _Uria grylle_, N.E.; clear.
  March 15th, _U. brunnichii_, N.E.; clear.
  March 15th, _U. troile_, N.E.; clear.
  March 15th, _U. alle_, N.E.; clear.
  March 15th, _Alca torda_, N.E.; clear, hard.
  April 25th, _Mormon fratercula_, N.E., very fresh.
  April 30th, _Carbo cormoranus_, N.E., light air.
  April 30th, _C. graculus_, N.E., light air.
  April 30th, _Puffinus arcticus_, N.E., light air.

Faroe.--From Faroe, thanks again to our friend Herr H. C. Müller, we
have the following report, some twelve entries or so between Jan. 1st
and Sept. 10th, 1883:--

On Jan. 1st three Wild Swans, _C. musicus_, seen flying S. at noon. On
April 28th one _Gallinula chloropus_, Waterhen, taken alive in Vaay
in Bordó. Between May 3rd and 11th several White Wagtails seen during
N.N.E., stormy, with snow at different localities in the islands. On
May 27th two Red-necked Phalaropes were seen on the sea near Thorshavn
during S.W. wind, moderate, with showers of rain.

In August White Wagtails again appeared, when several were seen on the
21st at Thorshavn at noon, fresh W. breeze and clear. Between Aug. 28th
and Sept. 10th, Whimbrels (see under Whimbrel, Curlew) were preparing
for departure, and disappeared on the last-named date. During this time
the winds were from N.W. on Aug. 28th by N. to N.E. on Aug. 30th to
Sept. 3rd, and W. on the 10th, the day of departure.

_Note._--Herr H. C. Müller informs me that a lighthouse will be
shortly erected at Nossoe, in Faroe, eighty feet above the sea. Herr
Müller considers that this will prove a good station for observing
birds during migration. Suderöe would also be a good observatory.
He also told me of the occurrence, for the first time, of _Sciurus
noveboracensis_ at Nordtalik, Greenland, about May, 1882; and of the
occurrence also of a young Sabine's Gull at the same place. I have a
young Sabine's Gull, brought home last year (1883) by the whalers to
Dundee.

Of the progress of the scheme of accumulation of migrational data in
other parts of the world, we may notice here that Dr. Arthur proposes
to take up the subject at the lighthouses in New Zealand, and will send
the Committee his schedules for arrangement.

Our American friends have made a promising start with similar
intentions, but of a much wider scope, as is shown by the circular,
which we here reprint, as it will show to our reporters other
collateral subjects which offer plenty of opportunity for observation,
and which can easily be made as applicable here as in North America, as
regards our commoner species. Schedules somewhat more elaborate than
ours have been issued also to lighthouses in America:--

"At the first congress of the American Ornithologists' Union, held in
New York City, Sept. 26th-28th, 1883, a Committee on the Migration of
Birds was appointed. It is the purpose of this Committee to investigate
in all its bearings, and to the fullest extent possible, the subject
of the migration of birds in the United States and British North
America. The work will not be limited to the accumulation of records
of the times of arrival and departure of the different species, but
will embrace the collection of all data that may aid in determining
the causes which influence the progress of migration from season to
season. For example, severe storms, gales of wind, protracted periods
of unusually high or low temperature (for the locality and time of
year) are among the atmospheric conditions that are known to exert
marked effects upon the movements of birds. The opening of the leaves
and the flowering of certain plants, with the correlative appearance
of a multitude of insects, are also among the factors that have to do
with the abundance of many species. Hence the careful registration
of certain meteorological phenomena, and of the state of advancing
vegetation from day to day, will constitute prominent items in the
record books of the observer.

"For convenience in collecting and arranging the enormous mass of
material which will be accumulated by the joint labours of this army
of field workers, it has been deemed advisable to divide the vast
expanse of territory embraced in the United States and British North
America into thirteen districts, each of which will be placed under the
immediate direction of a competent superintendent."

Some time ago we received application from China for schedules
and letters of instructions, but as yet we have had no further
communication from that quarter. We would be glad to hear of the scheme
being started there also. Most of the lighthouse-keepers there are
Scotch and English.

The ordinary papers were sent to thirty stations on the East Coast of
Scotland, Faroe, and Iceland, as in former years. Twelve stations on
this coast have sent in forty-two schedules out of the twenty-six E.C.
stations of Scotland. All returns are much lighter than in 1882, and
this is more readily noticed when we compare the numbers of schedules
returned from our principal stations. Thus, from Sumburgh Head we have
three; from Pentland Skerries twelve (three more than in 1882); from
Bell Rock two; and from Isle of May only ten, as against nineteen in
1882.

                        East Coast of Scotland.

  '79 '80 '81 '82 '83
   *   *           *   4. N. Unst, Shetland         230 ft. J. Edgar.
       *   *   *       5. Whalsey Skerries, Shet.   143  "
               *       6. Bressay, Shetland         105  "
   *   *   *   *   *   7. Sumburgh Head, Shet.      300  "  D. M. Scott.
          Land Notes.--7B. Fair Isle.

                                Orkney.

   *   *   *   *       8. North Ronaldshay          140  "
                       9. Start Point                80  "
   *   *   *   *   *  10. Auskerry                  110  "  J. McDonald.
                       11. Hoy Sound (Low)           55  "
                       12. Hoy Sound (High)         115  "
                       13. Cantick Head             115  "
   *   *   *   *   *   14. Pentland Skerries        170  "  {D. McDonald.†
                                                            {J. Gilmour.

                               Mainland.

       *   *   *   *   15. Dunnet Head, Caithness   346  " D. Laidlaw.
                       16. Holborn Head, Caithness   75  " D. Laidlaw.
                   *   17. Noss Head, Caithness     175  " A. Greig.
                   *   18. Tarbat Ness, East Ross   175  " W. Davidson.‡
           *   *   *   19. Cromarty, E. Cromarty     60  " R. S. Ritson.
               *   *   20. Chanonry, Point Elgin     40  " J. McGill.§
               *       21. Covesea Skerries         160  "
                       22. Kinnaird Head, Aberdeen  120  "‖
                       23. Buchan Ness, Aberdeen    130  "
       *               24. Girdleness, Aberdeen     185  "
                       25. Montroseness, Aberdeen   124  "¶
   *   *   *   *   *   26. Bell Rock, Fife Coast     93  " J. Jack.
   *   *   *   *   *   27. I. of May, Firth of Forth 240  " J. Agnew.
       *   *   *   *   28. Inchkeith, F. of Forth   220  " R. Grierson.
                       29. St. Abb's Head, Berwicks 224  "

† Mr. D. McDonald removed from Pentland Skerries to Skervuile (W.
C.) about July 26th, up to which time he sent returns from Pentland
Skerries. Thereafter Mr. J. Gilmour took in hand the returns at the
latter station.

‡ I have to thank Mr. W. Davidson for the first schedule received
from Tarbat Ness. Between Aug. 15th and Oct. 30th there are only
eleven entries,' all light, of ten different dates only. This schedule
is valuable for its negative evidence, just as other more favoured
localities for migrants give valuable positive evidence. Can I not
induce others to return even empty schedules at the end of the year,
with the simple remark "No Birds" or "Few Birds" attached, if such is
the case? Then our Committee would have certainty to go by, not merely
hypothesis. Mr. Davidson gives me the further information regarding
this station, that he observed no further migration since Oct. 30th,
the weather being so mild. It is usually before any changes in the
weather that we see any birds passing here besides the birds which
frequent the locality. The situation of Tarbat Ness is a very high
tower, 175 feet, and is joined to farmhouses. It is not much sheltered,
the tower being on the bare point. At some seasons great quantities of
birds are seen (_in lit._, Jan. 20th, 1884).

§ At Chanonry lighthouse the schedule, again kindly returned by Mr.
McGill, pretty clearly indicates and illustrates the action of local
migrations. Thus he tells us:--"There are plenty of Black Crows, which
fly between this and Nairn every day for feeding in the morning, and
fly back at night. A great many grey ducks come down on this Firth for
the purpose of feeding. It would seem they do not migrate. There are
several flocks of birds which seem to fly north the one day and in a
few days to fly back to the south; they seem to be the same flocks
that have been feeding." From Chanonry Mr. McGill writes:--"Only one
bird has struck the lantern since I came here in the summer of 1882,
and only two lighted on the lantern. None killed." The returns from
this station almost all relate to local movements, but are not on this
account less valuable, but rather more so, as giving good opportunity
of making comparisons and deductions. Most of the occurrences are
attended by highly developed pressures, squalls, strong breezes, &c.,
but the directions of these are not given.

‖ Mr. D. M. Scott, who left this station, removed to Sumburgh Head.
He sent the description of a bird from Kinnaird Head in 1882, but no
schedule. Scarcity is the true reason of lack of returns from this
station. Mr. Scott has sent well-filled schedules since from Sumburgh
Head.

¶ "No Birds" at Montroseness, reason given for absence of returns in
1882 (_q.v._).

From Kinnaird Head Lighthouse I have the following reply to my
inquiry:--"Birds at this lighthouse are every year getting more scarce,
as the town is now extended to the lighthouse, and cooperage works at
the very gate make much noise, and sparks of fire fly about whilst
making the barrels." At the same time Mr. D. M. Scott, now at Sumburgh
Head, tells me he has once caught, in one watch, forty-eight Starlings
at the lantern, and some Thrushes.

I have also to thank Mr. Alexander Greig for the first return from Noss
Head. The movements of Gannets, as related there, cannot fail to be of
use to the Committee. Mr. Greig says, "There has been great scarcity of
birds this last year, except those which are generally with us."

Through Mr. Thomas Southwell's kindness I have received a few items
of interest from the log of the whaler 'Eclipse,' Capt. D. Gray.
Also a note from Mr. T. H. Nelson, taken on board the 'Camoens,' 150
miles N.N.W. of Orkney; as also a note or two, through the kindness
of Mr. Robert Gray, taken on board the 'Marathon' in the Atlantic by
Mr. Thomas Anderson. These are now given; and the land notes will be
entered after the paragraphs on each species or group.

'Eclipse.'--March 28th, 1883, 70° 7′ north, 3° 40′ west, saw
but one Hooded Seal to-day, but plenty of Rotches, Looms, Snow
Birds, and Mallemauks. April 19th, 69° 53′ north, 5° 30′ west,
saw a few Bottlenose Whales, and at night a Merlin lighted on the
fore-topsail-yard, and there fell asleep, and was afterwards caught.
He seemed very tired and weak. I made a box for him, and fed him on
small pieces of meat. April 22nd, the Hawk seems to be thriving; he is
kept below during the day and on deck when it is fine. April 24th, 68°
29' north, 9° 12′ west, let the Hawk away at 10 a.m. He flew straight
to S.W. At 2 p.m. spoke the 'Catharine' brig. Whilst speaking the
'Catharine' I was astonished to see my old friend the Hawk sitting on
one leg in the lower quarter boat, looking very disconsolate, and,
when scared, immediately flew to the 'Catharine.' He had evidently
come across that vessel at sea, and had flown on board her. May 2nd,
68° 20′ north, 11° 30′ west, a great many birds about the ship, a few
hundreds of Mallemauks, and numerous Snow Birds, Burgomasters, Snow
Buntings, two Eider Ducks, and one Iceland Falcon. May 4th, the vessel
was followed by a good many Mallemauks, Burgomasters, Snow Birds, &c.
May 18th, 69° 37′ north, 9° 9′ east, in the morning a Loom alighted
on the main-topsail-yard, and Rotches have been numerous, besides the
usual number of Mallemauks, Kittiwakes, Snow Birds, and Burgomasters.
May 22nd, 69° 59′ 3° west, about 65 miles N.N.E. from Jan Mayen, "a
few Bottlenose Whales seen during the day, and several Black-headed
Gulls and Whimbrels." [This is an interesting note in the distribution
of the Whimbrel, which species Capt. Gray knows well, having brought
home skins before now, all the way from the coast of S. Greenland, and
others have arrived, brought by other whalers, at least two of which
are in our collection.--J. A. H. B.] June 10th (70° 32′ north, 1° 29′
west), a Swallow or Martin seen. May 16th (about 67° 41′ north, 14°
34′ west), two birds known at home as Wheatears and Water Wagtails
["Watee Wagtails" (_sic_) local in Forfar.--J. A. H. B.] came on board
and died. They were experiencing very heavy weather at the time.

'Marathon.'--October 12th, 1883 (46° 43′ north, 35° 39′ west), six or
seven Snow Buntings flew on board, winter plumage, wind fresh N.W., and
only two remained, the others leaving to go to another vessel passed by
the 'Marathon.' The other vessel had a deck-load of wood.--R. G.

'Camoens.'--Mr. T. H. Nelson writes:--"A friend of mine took a trip to
Iceland in the 'Camoens' last October. On Oct. 14th, 150 miles N.N.W.
of Orkney, a Starling flew on board. On the journey both there and
back, _viz._, between Oct. 18th and Dec. 3rd, a great many small birds
were seen _flying south_, but my friend was not well enough versed in
Ornithology to be able to identify them."

Notes are presented upon about seventeen species of water-fowl and
fifty-four species of land birds, and about thirteen species of waders
or littoral species, by our east coast reporters.

Spring migration having been more considerable this season, I keep
separate in this Report.

The movements recorded occupy the whole year, from date of February to
June, during spring, and from date of July to January, during autumn.


Separate Report under Genera and Species.

Turdidæ.--In spring a considerable migration noticed at certain
stations, _viz._, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, and Isle of May.
Began Feb. 2nd, when a rush of Song Thrushes took place at Bell
Rock, and terminated May 10th, when, and upon the 9th, there were
indications of another rush of Fieldfares and Ring Ouzels. Whilst Song
Thrushes, Redwings, and Blackbirds seem usually to travel together,
the larger-winged Fieldfares and Ring Ouzels are usually associated
in our returns, though not invariably. Although this spring migration
was spread over such a very considerable time, none of the returns
are very heavy; but indications of rushes are sufficiently distinct.
At Bell Rock, as above stated, on Feb. 2nd, strong E.N.E., with haze.
Fieldfares and Ring Ouzels; at Isle of May, on March 2nd, light W.,
clear, Thrushes and Blackbirds--a decided but not large rush, which
stopped abruptly with wind changing to gales from S.E. to E.N.E. and
to N.W. (see Third Report, General Remarks, p. 67.--J. A. H. B.). In
April, light but fairly continuous entries at Pentland Skerries and
Isle of May, but little indication of a general movement, except on
April 27th, when a good many Fieldfares and Ring Ouzels were noted at
Isle of May, wind fresh S.E. Prevailing winds up to termination of
spring migration, easterly along whole coast. On May 2nd, and again on
9th and 10th, there were faint indications of rushes at Isle of May,
principally of Fieldfares.

In autumn the migration was pronounced, and confined principally to
October and November. Yet the earliest record we have yet received in
Scotland in our schedules occurred on Aug. 28th, at Isle of May, of
two Song Thrushes, followed by a single record on Sept. 21st; also
at Isle of May, "a few Redwings and Ring Ouzels." Again, passing at
present over October and November, only one record in December of a
solitary Fieldfare on the 5th; and in January, 1884, a flock on the
7th and three birds on the 22nd, during a wild W. gale. The month of
October has many entries, and I find the word "rush" opposite the
following dates and stations:--At Pentland Skerries and Isle of May,
but not at Bell Rock, on 13th-15th, hundreds of Redwings and Ring
Ouzels, also Blackbirds and Thrushes, besides many other birds whose
names I will give later. Also at N. Unst a few stragglers rested on
the 16th, and then flew south, with strong S.E. wind and haze. Again,
from about Oct. 28th to Nov. 5th, a great movement, developing into
vast rushes, between Oct. 30th and Nov. 3rd, on which latter day a
Dipper (_Cinclus_) was seen on the Isle of May; twice fired at for
the collection, but escaped. The stations, N. Unst, Sumburgh Head,
Pentland Skerries, Tarbat Ness, Bell Rock, and Isle of May participated
(maximum at Isle of May), but also large numbers at Pentland Skerries,
Bell Rock, and goodly appearance at Sumburgh Head on Nov. 1st. On
Oct. 13th-15th wind was S., but shifted to W. at Isle of May. On
Oct. 28th and 29th wind was S., light and clear; and on 30th to Nov.
1st still prevailing southerly and westerly. Mr. Agnew states that
the rush on 13th-15th was the largest ever witnessed by him at Isle
of May with a due S. wind, S.E. being usually the most productive.
Having detailed the movements and given dates and circumstances of
these rushes, I will now name the other species which participated
in them, and refer back to this paragraph afterwards throughout the
Report. During the October rush, 13th-15th, Redwings in hundreds; Ring
Ouzels, Bramblings, Larks, Woodcock, Short-eared Owl, Yellow Bunting,
Eider Ducks in large flocks; Chaffinches, Crows (Carrion and Hooded),
Jackdaws (the largest flock ever seen at Isle of May), Bramblings,
Tree Sparrows, Blackbirds, Thrushes, and one Missel Thrush; besides,
in smaller numbers. Wagtails, Redstarts, Hawks, &c. During the great
October to November rush the following participated: Sandpipers, Snow
Buntings, Skylarks, as far as N. Unst; and southwards. Lapwings, Grey
Crows, Robins (smaller numbers), Linnets, Chaffinches, Starlings. At
Sumburgh Head a large migration of Thrushes, with Starlings, Larks, and
Linnets; many killed. At Pentland Skerries rush began on 20th, and also
at Isle of May, principally _Turdidæ_ and _Emberizidæ_. At Bell Rock,
on Oct. 31st--Nov. 1st, rush began at 7 a.m. Mr. Jack writes:--"Immense
numbers killed. I have no doubt they were killed in hundreds. What we
think were Woodcocks struck with great force. Birds continued flying
within the influence of the rays of light till the first streak of day,
continually striking hard all night, and falling into the sea. Although
we cannot be sure, we think there was a great number of Woodcocks
struck and fell into the sea."[1] Species of _Turdidæ_ seven, including
_Cinclus_.

[Footnote 1: What a loss of useful food to the lighthouse-keepers,
which might perhaps be saved to them by a few long poles and an old
herring-net stretched round and outside the balcony. This fact is
surely worthy of the attention of the Commissioners and all Directors
of our Lighthouse Stations.]

Saxicolinæ.--In spring considerable arrival of at Pentland Skerries,
Bell Rock, and Isle of May. Earliest (a single Stonechat (_vera_)
_S. rubicola_) on March 20th, at Isle of May, with light E. wind and
haze. [N.B.--In our Third Report, p. 8, the first record was on 29th
of Wheatear, but this record in Mr. Agnew's schedule was entered as
"Stonechat." Owing to the confusion existing between the Wheatear and
"Stonechat" it is usually almost impossible to know to which the name
Stonechat is applied. The true Stonechat is very like a Whinchat,
and in no respect resembles the Wheatear, except in the sound of its
voice.] The next earliest was of three Redstarts (or Firetails), on
March 29th, also at Isle of May, S.E. fresh, haze. Indications of a
rush of Wheatears between April 5th and 13th, at Isle of May; and much
lighter indications of single birds at same dates at Pentland Skerries.
Redstarts scarce; two on April 27th, one on 26th at Isle of May, and
a few at same place. These in every instance with light or fresh S.E.
winds in April, and light N.E. in May.

In autumn a considerable migration, commencing on August 20th; first
record at Isle of May--"Stonechat" [one earlier record occurs at same
place on July 14th, but it is perhaps difficult to say to what this
belongs, as Wheatears breed annually on Isle of May]; one killed at
lantern. Fresh N.W. wind, and terminating as far as schedules indicate,
by Nov. 11th. In this statement are included Wheatears, "Stonechats,"
[true Stonechats identified], Redstarts; but there are no records at
any stations of Wheatears or Stonechats between Sept. 12th and Nov.
1st. October is, curiously enough, entirely blank of any returns of
_Saxicolinæ_, and there are only two records in November. The rushes
took place end of August, culminating on the night of Sept. 2nd-3rd,
when a great rush of Wheatears, Redstarts, and also Chiffchaffs, Robins
and Sedge Warblers, Wood Warblers, and Golden and Grey Plovers took
place. The absence of any record of Thrushes or _Turdidæ_ at this date
at any of the stations is noteworthy. Mr. Agnew writes:--"The night
of Sept. 2nd was very stormy, wind S.E., shifting to N.E., with heavy
rain. The birds were all in large numbers throughout the night, except
a Blue-throated Warbler, adult, which was solitary." On the 12th,
nearly all Wheatears left the Isle of May. On the 4th, at Pentland
Skerries, a rush all day with strong N. wind and rain. Indications at
Bell Rock very faint throughout. In the vast rush of _Turdidæ_ and
other species (see _Turdidæ_ under date) of Nov. 1st, one solitary
Wheatear is first recorded, the first notice since Sept. 12th. In all
three species of _Saxicolinæ_ with certainty.

_Note._--The true Wheatear, "white on the rump," is intended in the
return from Pentland Skerries.

Silviinæ.--In spring, earliest record (Robin) is March 18th, at
Pentland Skerries, and with an E.S.E. gale and sleet; and the latest
(also Robin) on May 11th, at Sumburgh Head, fresh, S.S.E. A rush of
Robins at Isle of May on April 26th, when "large numbers" appeared;
fresh, S.E. and haze. Robins disappeared from Cromarty station on March
30th.

In autumn, earliest record at Isle of May on Aug.
16th,--Whitethroat,--when almost a rush might be recorded. On the
23rd again, at same place, large numbers of Whitethroats and Titmice.
At Cromarty station Robins reappeared, about a dozen being seen on
Sept. 15th, the first since spring. On Sept. 15th, a rush of Robins
at Isle of May, and on 22nd. Winds on all these dates easterly, with
fog, and on 15th "flying banks of fog." Records also of Blackcap on
10th, and more Blackcaps on 23rd; that on 10th with light W. wind, the
others light E. No records in October except at Chanonry, two on 15th,
strong squalls and S.W. Small numbers beginning of November, amongst
Thrushes, &c., _q.v._ stations; Pentland Skerries, light; Dunnet Head,
one record; the latest on Dec. 28th; and Jan. 30th, at Chanonry; light
squalls and sleet. Bell Rock and Isle of May (maximum). Blue-throated
Warbler on night of Sept. 2nd-3rd. In all three species.

Phylloscopinæ.--In spring a distinct movement of Goldcrests, but
nothing to compare with the autumn rush of 1882, though comparing
favourably with the spring rush of the same year. Earliest record,
April 1st, Isle of May; then singly or in small numbers till 13th, when
rather more, along with other species. Latest date of Goldcrests or
other Leaf-warblers, April 16th, at Pentland Skerries; one Goldcrest;
light N.E., clear. The first Chiffchaff on April 26th; also at Isle of
May; wind S.E. and haze; and some again on May 2nd; and Willow Warblers
and Chiffchaffs on May 15th.

In autumn a rush at Isle of May and no previous records; on Sept.
3rd (see _Saxicolinæ_); on the 2nd a S.E. gale, changing light W.,
very dark. Scattered records running through 10th, 11th, to 15th,
when another rush of Willow Warblers and Chiffchaffs, and a solitary
Goldcrest on 22nd, with a rush of Robins. Goldcrests did not put in an
appearance much before Oct. 10th, when a rush took place that night,
with light E. wind and cloudy, again at Isle of May. Mr. D. M. Scott
speaks of the "smallest wrens he ever saw," which were seen at Sumburgh
Head, on Oct. 28th, which were probably of this species. Stations
recording are Sumburgh Head (one record); Tarbat Ness one record on
Oct. 30th [some years Caithness gets a large share of Goldcrests]; and
Isle of May. Three species.

Paridæ.--A few scattered notices in April and May at Pentland Skerries
on April 25th, 27th and 29th, with S. easterly and N.E. wind; rain,
haze or clear; and at same place on May 13th. _Note._--Mr. MacDonald
distinguishes between "Titmice" and "Tomtits." Titmice are probably
Cole Tits, and "Tomtits" Blue Tits, _Parus cæruleus_.

In autumn, in September, a few at Isle of May, on 4th, 5th, 18th, 19th;
on the 4th and 19th, travelling with "Stonechats"; also at Isle of May;
winds westerly and northerly. In October, one record at Inchkeith; wind
light S.W., which seems the usually chosen wind at this locality for
birds migrating. In November, on the 18th, one bird, which is either a
Cole Tit or a Great Tit, at Isle of May.

Acrocephalinæ--Accentorinæ.--A Solitary record of one Sedge Warbler, at
Isle of May, on May 17th, constitutes the whole spring returns.

In autumn, only two records in all; one at Isle of May on Sept. 12th,
of one Sedge Warbler, with light S.E., haze and rain; and the other
on Oct. 11th, at same place, of a Hedge Sparrow ("Blue Janet" of
Schedule). One species of Marsh Warblers, and one probably _Saxicolinæ_.

Troglodytinæ, Common Wren.--On April 9th, one struck and killed (No.
66, in spirits); light W., clear!

In autumn, on Aug. 18th, at Sumburgh Head, a few remained two days;
light W. and haze. Wrens not in large numbers accompanied rush of other
migrants on Sept. 22nd and 23rd; fresh E. and very dark, at Isle of
May. In October, one record at N. Unst, resting at 10 a.m.; S.W., light
and haze ("a rare visitor.") It would be interesting to know if this
was one of the large-footed form found in Faroe (_T. Faröensis_), or
our common species.[2] In November, a few on 7th at Isle of May; and
at Tarbat Ness, one on Oct. 27th; in November, three seen at Sumburgh
Head, with strong breeze and hailstones.

[Footnote 2: This I hope to be able to decide next year, should any
turn up at this station.]

Motacillidæ.--In Spring, at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May.
Earliest, March 2nd, at Isle of May; light W., clear; with a rush of
other migrants. Five seen on March 30th--"the most ever seen together
in spring," at Isle of May, "by Mr. Agnew;" a gale from the S. the
previous night, but wind westerly when seen; these birds flying north.
Other records are with E. or S.E. winds, on 19th, 20th and 23rd. In
April, two records at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May, on 3rd and
25th.

In autumn, records from Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock and Isle of May.
Earliest, July 13th, at the first-named station, and again on 28th,
with fresh N. wind and haze or rain. Scattered records in August,
mostly at Pentland Skerries, with northerly winds; but two records,
one with light S. and clear, and the other, Aug. 18th, with fresh W.
and cloudy, when thirteen were counted. In September, a flock at Bell
Rock on 1st; a few on 2nd, at Pentland Skerries; a number on 11th,
with Robins, at Isle of May. In October, one record at Isle of May, on
10th, light E., haze; and the latest record at Isle of May, one bird on
7th. The Wagtails on Oct. 10th are described as very light-coloured,
but from the good description it is easily seen that they are immature
birds of probably the Pied Wagtail. But it is desirable to watch for
_very light_ or _light-backed birds_ at Isle of May and elsewhere, and
especially at Bell Rock, _during the spring_ migration, as such may
prove to be the continental White Wagtail.

Anthidæ.--In spring, the Rock Pipits resident at the Isle of May
received considerable additions to their numbers on March 19th, and
Meadow Pipits arrived in small numbers on 21st, which is an early date.
On April 3rd, both had much increased in numbers. "Moss-cheepers,"
_i.e._, Meadow Pipits, are also noted at Bell Rock, on April 27th.

In autumn the movement was never great. Noted at Bell Rock, and,
curiously enough, _not_ at Isle of May, nor at any other stations.
Duration: Aug. 9th--light S. breeze, fog, one resting--to Nov. 1st,
when one was noted along with the vast rush of other migrants (see
_Saxicolinæ_). Indication of the rush very faint about Sept. 1st,
when a flock rested on the Rock; a few more seen on 16th, 19th and
22nd; winds light S.W. on 1st, light N.W. on 22nd, and E.N.E. on 19th;
calm on 16th. On Oct. 9th also a flock flying with "Bullfinches."
[These latter may, Mr. Jack thinks, be named wrong, and may be either
Crossbills or Hawfinches.]

_Land Notes._--A Waxwing, _Ampelis garrula_,--a male in full
plumage,--was found at North Unst, of which Mr. Garrick writes me
that it had been kept too long and could not unfortunately be
preserved. Two very fine old Waxwings were shot at Kinneil Woods,
near Borrowstonness (or Bo'ness), by Mr. D. Nichol, gamekeeper to Mr.
Russell, Dundas Castle, on Jan. 18th, 1883.

Laniadæ.--A male killed at Helensburgh (Dumbartonshire), shot by Major
Allan Colquhoun, Feb. 3rd, 1883.

Hirundinidæ.--In spring, _i.e._, till end of June, records reach me
from Sumburgh Head, Auskerry, Pentland Skerries and Isle of May. (It is
often difficult to draw the line in the case of _Hirundinidæ_, between
spring migration, local flights, and autumn migration. This year,
however, they are tolerably distinct, as I have no records during the
whole of July). Earliest spring record is at Sumburgh Head, on April
21st, a single bird, and the next is at Isle of May on April 26th;
winds in both cases S.E., and two more on 28th. No more till May 14th,
with S.W. wind at Isle of May. Occasional light returns all through
May, at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May; winds easterly at former,
and westerly at latter. _Note._--None breed at Isle of May. No rush
distinguishable. In June the dates are 5th (at Sumburgh Head and at
Pentland Skerries), Sand Martin; 10th, four seen at Sumburgh Head,
and 13th, 14th, 17th and 26th, at different stations; winds from all
directions between S.W. at Sumburgh Head by N. to E. Swallows arrived
at Cromarty on May 13th; first seen.

In autumn, the movement, as far as I can judge, extended through August
and September, and lingered into October, the latest record coming
from Sumburgh Head on Oct. 6th. A rush is indicated by the returns on
Sept. 8th and 15th at Isle of May, when "considerable numbers," "large
numbers," and on the 19th, "some," are the data. Wind light W. on 8th,
and easterly the other days. The directions of flight of Swallows
recorded in August vary considerably. Thus, at Pentland Skerries, one
Martin flying E.; strong S.E. and rain, on Aug. 8th; one Swallow,
"flying around," on 9th; fresh E., showers, and "flying W."; on 20th
light S.E. and haze. At Isle of May, five Swallows flying S., light
S.E., haze on 22nd, and flock "flying S." on 30th; light S.E., haze.
Swallows left Cromarty on Sept. 8th; last seen.

_Land Notes._--Swallows seen by me in some numbers at Kirkmichael
House, Dumfries, on evening of April 13th, flying over the artificial
ponds. Also seen at Morningside by A. B. Herbert, on 15th. I have
the following notes from Dr. John Grieve, at Bridge of Allan, which
locality is famed in spring for the shelter afforded from east winds.
Dr. Grieve's notes refer however to autumn notes. In 1880 Swifts left
the Bridge of Allan on Aug. 10th. In 1879 Swifts left between 8th and
17th, and in 1882 on the 8th. "Previous to leaving they always chase
one another round the houses until two days before leaving; then they
appear to keep to higher air." In 1881 two were seen on May 3rd, being
the first arrivals. In 1880 about 200 "Martins and a few Swallows
collected on two houses in Bridge of Allan on Aug. 22nd, and similar
congregations took place in smaller numbers on 27th to 31st, and on
Sept. 8th. On Oct. 4th, frost; and in afternoon some twenty-five seen.
On Oct. 6th, five to one hundred seen hawking over the wood behind
Bridge of Allan. On 8th, six seen. On 8th, hard frost and fog; four
seen flying about _in silence_; next morning, hard frost. On 20th, 15°
frost; on 21st, 6°; 22nd, 10°; and 23rd, 2°. But on 23rd two Swallows
seen. These were the last that year." In 1882 great numbers of Swallows
and Martins were seen flying eastward, outside the cliffs of Beachy
Head on Oct. 4th, and a good many remained along the undercliff of the
Isle of Wight at Ventnor.

The above notes by Dr. Grieve are quite to the point, and if we could
continue to receive land notes such as these from all parts of the
country they would be sure to prove most useful, even if confined to
one or two species of regular migrants.

Fringillidæ.--Both in spring and autumn, one of the features of the
1883 migration is the number of records of Finches (also of Thrushes,
and to a less extent of Buntings), whilst Thrushes--of sorts--and
Finches, seem usually to travel together; there seems, if we may
so call it, more uniform action in the formers' movements in 1883.
The Thrushes' movements are more compressed: those of Finches more
extended in time; or, in other words, the spring and autumn migrations
of the _Turdidæ_ are more strongly defined than those of the Finches.
Thrushes (including Blackbirds and all species) are totally absent
during June and July (not including residents of course), and almost
absent during August and September, and again the same in December and
January (1884). But, though the migrations of the Finches are easily
defined, still they do spread out more over the whole year, and, with
the exception of July, occupy considerable space in the schedule. These
remarks are intended to apply only to 1883, not as a general statement.

In spring, records come from five of the stations giving returns,
_viz._, Sumburgh Head, Auskerry, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock and Isle
of May. The earliest, two Green Linnets at Isle of May, on Feb. 17th
(the only record of that month). Again, at Isle of May, Tree Sparrows
and Chaffinches on March 2nd--single birds. Latest, June 22nd, at
Pentland Skerries--four "Linnets." These are probably Twites or else
Grey Linnets. During April, between 1st and 5th, there was a rush of
Grey Linnets with light W. wind, clear, along with other species; and
during the month there are lighter movements recorded of the following
species:--Chaffinch, Sumburgh Head; Common Sparrow, Pentland Skerries;
Green Linnets, Isle of May; Bramblings, Tree Sparrows and Bullfinches.
Wind at Sumburgh Head light S.E., but elsewhere generally light W. and
usually clear. In May a small flock of Sparrows at Auskerry, from the
14th to 31st; one Brambling, one Chaffinch, one Green Linnet, between
10th and 15th, with fresh N.N.E. wind.

In autumn, at North Unst, one flock, Oct. 17th; S.E., light, haze;
Sumburgh Head, considerable migration in October--November with other
species (see Thrush). Pentland Skerries, small indication as compared
with more southerly stations; Chanonry, light; Tarbat Ness, full
migration; Bell Rock, rush; and Isle of May, rushes. Earliest, Aug.
5th; numbers of small flocks; wind light W. at Isle of May. Latest,
Dec. 26th, at Isle of May. Rushes:--General rush of migrants, Sept.
22nd, at Isle of May, in which Bramblings participated; Oct. 13th,
at Tarbat Ness, Bramblings, wind due S.; also rush of same, 15th and
16th, same place; and rush also of Tree Sparrows, Chaffinches, "Green
Buntings" (? Green Linnets), and Linnets, at Chanonry; strong breeze
and showers; movements all through October of these same species; also
Linnets at Pentland Skerries; Siskins ("Sisting" of schedule), one
flock, old and young, on 7th, at Tarbat Ness, and again five on Oct.
29th. Light S., haze, on 30th at Pentland Skerries--date of principal
rush,--but westerly gales at Tarbat Ness on 29th. At the time of rush
between Oct. 13th and 16th, at Tarbat Ness, the wind began at due
S.; 14th, strong S., and to noon on 10th; then to W. and west gale at
night of 15th. West gales continued to end of month. By Nov. 1st to
3rd a vast rush at Bell Rock and Isle of May, and also at Sumburgh
Head. By the 5th, rush all over and almost all left. Pentland Skerries
did not appear to participate largely in this rush. The species are
chiefly Chaffinches and Bramblings, also Green Linnets, Gray Linnets
and Sparrows. Prevailing winds westerly. In December, fewer records
at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May. Winds prevailing N.W. and W.
At Dunnet Head "Linnets" are reported present all the year round. In
January, 1884, one or two light records of Brambling and Greenfinch
at Isle of May. Latest, Jan. 12th. _Note._--Mr. Gilmour, Pentland
Skerries, writes he was not sure of the Chaffinches at that station,
when he took up the keeping of the records, and that they may prove to
be Snow Buntings, which is very likely. Mr. D. M. Scott, at Sumburgh
Head, writes under date of Oct. 11th, "a number of small birds killed
on balcony: picked up four Green Linnets and two Chaffinches. I
discovered to-day what becomes of them after being killed. In a hole
of a stone dyke I found a large number of wings and legs of small
birds, taken there by Weasels" (_i.e._, _Mustela erminea_, which was
introduced to Shetland. The Common Weasel, _Mustela vulgaris_, is
not an inhabitant of Shetland). If Mr. Scott would in future collect
all the wings and send them to me by post, they would be useful in
identifying species; or, at any time, if a rare bird occurs, the name
of which is not known, the wings, might be sent (see addition to letter
of instructions, issued 1884). Mr. Agnew notes that he had never before
witnessed such a large migration at Isle of May, with a due S. wind, as
that of Oct. 13th, 14th, and 15th. Chaffinch was heard singing on Feb.
28th at Dunipace.

Corvidæ.--I have records every month in the year but June. In January,
1884, one Hooded Crow flying north, W.S.W. gale, clear. In February,
1883, records of Grey Crows, Jackdaws (at Isle of May, "very rare" on
13th and 14th, light S. and S.W., shifting to N). Rooks (at Isle of
May, on. 19th, a single bird). In March, Rooks (at Pentland Skerries
a flock all day, fresh S.E., cloudy), and one Hooded Crow (on 19th at
Isle of May, light, S.E.). In April, at Sumburgh Head, Bell Rock, and
Isle of May, Rooks and Carrion Crows and one Hooded Crow; prevailing
winds S.E., clear. One Black Crow flying north at Noss Head, with light
N.W. and clear. In May two records only at Sumburgh Head on 3rd, and at
Pentland Skerries, on 11th, of Rooks (two flying W., fresh W. breeze
and clear).

In autumn, in July, all the records are of Rooks, all at one station,
_viz._, Pentland Skerries, and in each case birds remaining on island
all day; winds moderate N., cloudy or clear, but strong S. on 27th. In
August, Rooks again at Pentland Skerries, on island; single birds. The
above are probably merely local predatory excursions from the mainland
of Scotland. In Sept. eighteen Ravens seen at Sumburgh Head, flying S.,
light N.E. and clear. In October many more records. At Sumburgh Head
twelve to twenty Hooded Crows continually fighting with, four large
Hawks, one of which was so exhausted as nearly to allow Mr. D. M. Scott
to catch it on the ground. Many single or other light records. The
most seen, thirty Jackdaws (the largest flock Mr. Agnew has ever seen
on Isle of May), on Oct. 15th, S. to W. winds; also twenty-six Carrion
Crows and a few "Hoodies" on 31st at Isle of May. Of these sixteen
came from the north at 3 p.m., light S. and haze. In November Carrion
and Hooded Crows attended the rush of migrants on 1st, coming from the
north. On the 3rd the Isle of May was literally swarming with birds,
and on the 9th Jackdaws, two in number, reappeared; light W., clear. In
December, at Sumburgh Head, two "large Black Crows" (Carrion Crows?),
or, as the natives call them, "Scotch Crows"; strong breeze and hail
showers. A very regular local migration of Crows or Rooks takes place
day after day past Chanonry from and to Nairn, feeding in the morning
and back at night. At Sumburgh Head Grey Crows are seen almost daily.
_Land Notes._--Mr. R. Gray writes me that great numbers of Hooded
Crows are at present frequenting Tyne Woods on the estate of the Earl
of Haddington in East Lothian. They came some time ago in a body,
and have been seen feeding on the mud and sands of the estuary, and
betaking themselves to the woods at night to roost. These are evidently
migratory flocks, which have crossed Heligoland and landed on our east
coast without being actually observed in transit.

Sturninæ.--In spring, from Feb. 8th at Pentland Skerries to April 23rd
at same place. Only four records in that time.

In autumn, great continuous migration at Auskerry, July 30th, of old
and young; light W. One flock on August 7th at Pentland Skerries all
day; one flock stayed from March 15th to 24th at Sumburgh Head, and
many large flocks also seen to the north of that place at the same
time. In October two small Starlings, "one with a crest like a Crested
Lark, raised and lowered it at will" [Rose-coloured Pastor?--J. A.
H. B.] seen on 6th, light N. wind. Rushes took place on Nov. 1st,
especially at Sumburgh Head and Isle of May (see also under Thrush).
Latest, Dec. 31st, at Isle of May; but the Starling is resident all the
year round at many of our stations.

Alaudidæ.--In spring at Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock,
and Isle of May. Earliest, Feb. 8th, a single bird at Bell Rock, and
several on 9th at Pentland Skerries (see under Thrush at this date).
Latest, April 6th, at Sumburgh Head, when they were found increasing,
but not observed on arrival. A rush took place at Isle of May on Feb.
11th, 1 a.m. till daylight, light E. and fog, flying south (at least
all struck the north side of lantern).[1] Other movements took place,
but none of any magnitude; winds S. and W. in Feb., except the 11th,
_ut sup._; N.W., S.W. to E. on 20th, in March.

[Footnote 3 1: Do the birds strike in light winds and fog upon the side
facing the wind, or on the sheltered side? In heavy gales they strike
_hard with the wind_, but touch and strike also on the Shetland side,]

In autumn, a few records at N. Unst, Isle of May, and Inchkeith.
Earliest, Sept. 21st, at Isle of May, a small flock, fresh E., clear.
Latest, Nov. 26th, a single bird at N. Unst rested all night. Rushes,
11th to 20th, W., shifting to N. on 11th; W. gale on 19th and 20th.
Also rush on 31st and Nov. 1st, along with other species, principally,
at Bell Rock and Isle of May. Again a few in January, 1884, up to 17th,
light W. winds and haze; and at Chanonry on 24th a flock, with strong
squalls and sleet. [3] Emberizidæ.--In spring Snow Buntings began to
appear on Feb. 9th,--but this may not belong to spring records,--when
a large flock flew about all day on Pentland Skerries. They occurred
also at Auskerry, Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, and Isle of May.
Earliest, as above. Latest, April 12th, at Sumburgh Head, when two were
killed. No great rushes evident, but largest numbers passed in March,
mostly with northerly or westerly winds. If any rush occurred it was
between March 9th and 25th, indicated principally at Pentland Skerries
and Isle of May. On 23rd, at Isle of May, a flock flying north. Common
Bunting seen at Isle of May on Feb. 12th, and again on April 6th.
Yellow Buntings at same place on March 5th and April 7th, in both cases
females.

In autumn, as usual, we have numerous records, especially of Snow
Buntings, at most stations, _viz._, N. Unst, Sumburgh Head, Pentland
Skerries, Tarbat Ness, Dunnet Head, Bell Rock, and Isle of May.
Earliest at Isle of May on Sept. 21st. A rush on 22nd and 27th; fresh
E. to heavy S.W. gale on 26th and 27th. Latest records to Jan. 18th,
1884. Bushes in September _ut sup._, a few in October, many all through
November, but principally on 13th-15th, 16th, and in lesser degree on
1st and 2nd. Snow Buntings often appear with gales and snow or sleet,
but during this month S. and W. winds rather prevailed. They arrived
before the great W. gales, which began about the 16th. Of other species
we have as follows: Yellow Bunting, "Grey Bunting," "Green Bunting" (?
Green Linnet), and Cirl Bunting (one bird sent in spirits was not a
Cirl Bunting, but a young male Yellow Bunting). All these are recorded
from Isle of May, but no other station, and are distributed almost
entirely in October and December; prevailing winds westerly, with
stormy weather and gales.

Cuculidæ.--One spring record from Cromarty station: Arrived on April
29th; E., fresh breeze, haze.

One autumn record only, and the only record I have received from any
station during autumn migration, _viz._, one young bird at Isle of May
on August 23rd, light W., clear. Possibly amongst the many records of
"Hawks" at other stations some occurrences of the young brown-coloured
Cuckoo may have been included, as they are very like small Hawks in
their flight.

_Land Notes._--Cuckoo heard at Dunipace, Stirlingshire, on April 9th,
1883, a very early record. Not heard again till May. Cuckoo recorded
from Busby, at Lee Farm, near Sheddens, on April 14th. Cuckoo heard on
Tinwald Downs, Dumfries, on April 23rd.

Strigidæ.--In spring a Tawny Owl at Isle of May on April 28th, S.E.
fresh, haze; and at Auskerry an Owl (which is probably the Short-eared
Owl) came on the 14th, with stiff S.E. and showers, and remained a
week. "This Owl visits Auskerry annually in May."

In autumn, in September, one Owl on 28th at Pentland Skerries, strong
N.N.E. and showers. In October four single records of Large Owl at
Pentland Skerries on 31st and 13th, and of Short-eared Owls at Isle of
May on 3rd and 13th. None in December, and one Owl at Pentland Skerries
all day on island on 1st; light N.W. showers.

_Land Notes._--Short-eared Owls were reported unusually abundant on
Flanders Moss, Stirlingshire, in the autumn; and I saw two as late as
the 31st January, 1884, on Latham Moss, in the same county, so that
some appear to remain all winter.

Falconidæ.--Spring records in March and April only, March 2nd to April
30th. At Pentland Skerries and Isle of May all single or light entries;
wind easterly, except on March 2nd, when it was S.W. and clear, and one
Kestrel was seen. The Merlin is twice noted. "Light Brown Hawks twice
at Isle of May and Pentland Skerries."

In the autumn, at Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, Bell Rock, and
Isle of May. All July records, three in number, at Pentland Skerries,
of "Sparrowhawk," "Large Brown Hawk," and "Large Hawk." In August
five records, three at Isle of May of Sparrowhawk and "Hawks"; one
at Pentland Skerries of "Falcon Hawk"; and one at Sumburgh Head of
one Large Brown Hawk. The "Falcon Hawk" is described as "hovering,"
so is more likely a _Kestrel Hawk_. In September ten records; two at
Pentland Skerries, two "Hawks" and one "Game Hawk," and at Isle of May
one Sparrowhawk caught at gratings, and a "Hawk." Hawks are usually
found attending the rush of small migrants. In October only one record,
a Game Hawk at Pentland Skerries; four in November, all at Pentland
Skerries. None in December, and five in January, 1884. One bird Mr.
Agnew "feels almost sure was a Goshawk, and not a Sparrowhawk." The
rush, if any, would appear to be in September, but its faintness
precludes us from any feeling of certainty. A late schedule from
Sumburgh Head contains record of an Eagle ["Silver-crested Eagle";
probably the Sea Eagle] wounded at Fitful Head by Mr. Birnie. At 11.15
a.m. on January 29th, 1884, this bird landed on the high rocks, half a
mile north of the Read. Mr. Birnie says it cannot live long, as it was
severely wounded. Mr. Birnie is employed by the landed proprietors to
kill all the birds of prey in Shetland. He has killed a large number of
Black-backed Gulls, Hooded Crows, Ravens, &c.


Water Birds.

Pelecanidæ.--In entering records of Gannets or Solan Geese I believe
the best way is to arrange the data in tabular form. Spring records
are only returned from Pentland Skerries; but, considering the central
position on the tract through the Pentland Firth, I think all records
from there are of use and value, if we desire to arrive at conclusions
regarding the movements of this species.

_Spring,_

  March 26th, Pentland Skerries, three Gannets flying E.; strong
     N.E., and clear.

  April 6th, Pentland Skerries, one Gannet, 4.45 p.m., flying E.;
     light W., clear.

  May 7th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks of Gannets all day,
     flying E.; strong N., haze.

  May 16th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks of Gannets all day,
     flying E.; light N.E., clear.

  May 28th, Pentland Skerries, several Gannets all day flying round;
     strong S., showers.

  April 12th, Noss Head, four Gannets flying N.; light N.W., haze.

  June 28th, Noss Head, six Gannets flying S.E.; light S., fog.

_Autumn._

  July 1st to 15th, Auskerry, at 2 o'clock, flying from N. to S.;
     light W. breeze.

  July 5th, Pentland Skerries, 8.20 p.m., flying E.; mod. E., fog and
     rain.

  July 6th, Pentland Skerries, all day, several flocks flying E.;
     light S., haze.

  July 6th, Pentland Skerries, a few fishing all day round L.; light
     S., haze.

  July 7th, Pentland Skerries, several flocks fishing all day; mod.
     S.E., haze.

  July 8th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all day flying E.;
     mod. W., clear.

  July 15th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all day flying E.;
     mod. W., clear.

  July 16th to 20th to 26th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all
     day flying E.;[4] light N.W. to mod. N.

  July 27th, on to Aug., Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all day
     flying E.; N. to S.W.; and all this month, all going E., except
     several flocks on 22nd flying W.

[Footnote 4: On 16th a few young observed. All flying E., except six
seen on the 20th, flying W.]

  Sept. 3rd to 15th, Pentland Skerries, fewer, all flying S.W. on
     15th; light S.E., wind.

  Sept. 5th to 30th, Noss Head, daily, flocks of six to fifty flying
     N. all day.

  Oct. 19th, Noss Head, nineteen at 3 p.m.; strong W., haze and rain.

  Nov. 10th, Sumburgh Head, eight flying S., 12 noon; fresh N.
     breeze, hail.

The annual regularity with which the Solan Geese pass and repass
through the Pentland Firth and various other points of observation
cannot, we think, fail to develop, by the statistics accumulated, some
curious facts in migration. We are thus careful to record these with
some minuteness of detail. A late schedule from Sumburgh Head has--"Two
on 16th, Sumburgh Head. Eighteen Gannets flying S.W., 12 noon; strong
W., showers."

Ardeidæ.--We do not think it will be so easy, in regard to Herons, to
arrive at laws regulating their flights; but, in case of development,
will on this occasion tabulate their records, though we have not done
so before.

_Spring._

  March 29th, Pentland Skerries, one flying N., 3 p.m.: S. gale, rain.

  June 13th, Isle of May, one flying S., 5 p.m., in company with
     Gulls, which is rare.

  June 24th, Isle of May, one flying S., 5 p.m.; light W., clear.

_Autumn._

  Aug. 26th, Isle of May, one flying W.; light W., clear.

  Sept. 12th, Pentland Skerries, four flying about island (rare);
     light S., clear.

  Oct. 15th, Pentland Skerries, one rose off rocks, 4.15 p.m.

  Oct. 23rd, Isle of May, one; fair W., clear.

  Nov. 1st, Pentland Skerries, one flying S., 7.50 a.m.; light N.W.,
     cloudy.

  Jan. 29th, Sumburgh Head, six (one shot); fair W., clear.

There was a very large movement of Herons in 1882, principally in
October and November (see Report, 1882, p. 18).

Anatidæ.--Very few records either in spring or autumn. Spring: none.
Autumn: Swans on Aug. 15th, at Tarbat Ness, two from the N., flying
S.E. at 1 p.m.; N. strong, and clear. The only other records are in
October, a large flock flying E. past Pentland Skerries at 12.20 p.m.,
with light W. and showers, "very rarely seen here." On 19th, Ducks
(sp.?), three flying W. over same station at 10.30 a.m.; strong N.W.
wind. On 13th, Eiders at Isle of May in large flocks, both males and
females, all day; strong due S.; left at night. At Chanonry, local
movements of Grey Geese and Grey Ducks to and fro in stormy weather,
or from feeding to nesting ground. At Sumburgh Head, twenty-eight wild
Geese flying S.; strong S.W., and snow on 25th; and on 28th sixteen
wild Geese, also flying S.; gale from N.W. _Land Notes._--At Kirkwall,
twenty-five wild Swans frequented the Loch of Banks, and are described
as being "very tame" ('Scotsman,' 27, iii., 83). A very large flock of
Pink-footed or Bean Geese, probably the former, seen flying very high
towards S.E. and crying, at Kippen on March 23rd. Fully 150 Wild Geese
remained on Flanders Moss all spring after this date, and were seen
last on April 23rd.

Columbidæ.--In spring, few records at Pentland Skerries and Bell Rock.
On Feb. 19th, at former station, three Rock Doves flying E., 7 a.m.;
S.W., fresh, clear. On March 4th, two Rock Doves at same station, seen
at 3 p.m.; light variable, and haze. On April 20th, one Wood Pigeon at
same station flying S.E.; fair S.S.E., fog. On May 12th, one Woodpecker
flying S.W. past Bell Rock, 1.12 p.m.; strong S.W.; and on 28th, a few
Rock Doves at Pentland Skerries; strong S., and fog.

In autumn only two records; one at Pentland Skerries, twelve Rock
Pigeons, on July 23rd, on island; light N., haze and rain; and on Sept.
16th, one Wood Pigeon at 2 p.m., at Bell Rock, flying S.W.; light S.W.
breeze.

_Land Notes._--A male _Columba œnas_ (Stock Dove) was shot at Garden,
in this county (Stirlingshire), on March 15th, 1883. This species has
been rapidly extending its range of late years in Scotland. See my
paper on the Stock Dove (Ryl. Phyl. Soc. Edinb., 1883, p. 241, Feb.
21st). In 1884 at least four pairs are breeding in the Vale of Menteith.

Rallidæ.--Spring records meagre. One heard at Isle of May April 28th,
marked "rare here." One heard at Pentland Skerries on May 6th, 5.50
p.m.; mod. S.S.E., clear. One heard first time at Cromarty station on
May 20th; strong E., clear.

No autumn records this season.

Charadriadæ.--Spring records meagre. April 18th, at Pentland Skerries,
three Golden Plovers at 5 p.m.; S.S.W. May 15th, at Auskerry, large
flocks of Plovers all day; light E., and showers. May 17th, at Isle of
May, one Oystercatcher; W., very fine.

Autumn records almost equally meagre. July 13th, at Pentland Skerries,
one Golden Plover; fair N., light showers. Aug. 8th, at Pentland
Skerries, one Golden Plover; strong S.E. Aug. 14th, at Pentland
Skerries, one Golden Plover; light S.E., showers. Sept. 6th, at Isle
of May, six Golden Plovers; strong W., clear. Oct. 26th, at Pentland
Skerries, one "Silver Plover" (? Knot) killed at lantern; strong W.,
showers.

Of Lapwings, records are almost equally scanty. In spring, on Feb.
17th, a flock all day at Pentland Skerries; light S. breeze (see
Thrush). In March, along with the rush of other migrants on 2nd at
Isle of May; strong W., clear; and a number on 3rd. Lots of sixteen
and twenty on the 10th and 20th of same month; light E. and S.E., fog,
rain, and haze.

In autumn five Ringed Plovers stayed for some days on Isle of May on
and after Aug. 28th; came with light W., and clear--the only record
given of any Charadriadæ in autumn. At Chanonry, numerous records
of Lapwings lighting on the point, or passing in stormy weather or
in strong breezes, in Sept. to January, 1884. A late schedule from
Sumburgh Head has a record of Lapwings on Jan. 24th, with the remark,
"I believe they have never been seen here at this season of the year
before."

_Land Notes._--Lapwings seen in pairs on March 4th at breeding stations
in Stirlingshire.

Scolopacidæ.--Spring. Curlews first heard at Pentland Skerries on March
2nd, when heard at 2.15 p.m.; mod. N.W., fog. Last on June 29th (but
probably belongs to autumn) at same place, when a flock flying S.;
light S., clear. A rush between April 7th and 15th, a few flying south
between these dates at Isle of May,--scarcely an appreciable rush,--and
one record in May.

In autumn, not a great many records of Curlews. Earliest July 4th,
at Pentland Skerries, and on 15th and 29th at same station; also
in August, and at same station a few records, most probably local
movements. An apparent slight indication of a rush of Curlews in
September at three stations,--Sumburgh Head, Pentland Skerries, and
Isle of May,--young and old; and up to 23rd, at Isle of May, numbers
daily. Fewer in October, and occasional records up to January, 1884.

Of Snipe, a few scattered records in spring, in March and April. March
2nd to 9th, at Pentland Skerries and Isle of May; and April 12th and
26th, at same stations, winds mostly westerly; but on March 8th E.N.E.,
gale and snow.

In autumn, not abundant either, and scarcely require details. Occurred
in July, August, October (a large flock at Sumburgh Head on 18th; gale
and sleet showers), and December. In July, at Pentland Skerries only;
in August, ditto; in September, not at all. In October, at Sumburgh
Head and Pentland Skerries (and a Jack Snipe at Isle of May). December,
at Sumburgh Head (a large number all day on 3rd); strong breezes,
snow-showers; and a Jack Snipe at Pentland Skerries on 24th.

Woodcock.--In spring, one record on April 7th, at Bell Rock, flying
about the rock.

In autumn, Oct. 13th and 14th, two single birds at Isle of May and
Pentland Skerries; and on Nov. 1st and 13th, at Isle of May, N. Unst,
and Shetland. The one on 1st accompanied the rush of other migrants.
On Oct. 13th six were shot on Isle of May; wind due S., an unusual
wind for migrants to arrive at Isle of May. At Chanonry, many local
records of "Whaups" (Curlews)--probably the same flock of forty or
fifty--appearing in stormy weather.

_Land Notes._--On the night of March 26th, at Dunipace, whilst standing
at the front door (night bright and starry, and frost), a large flock
of birds crossed overhead, flying south. The cries were difficult to
make out, but belonged either to Whimbrels or other species of wader.
The subject of the sounds of bird-cries at night would form good matter
for explanation by those who have constant opportunities of hearing
them. Wind N.E. up to March 27th, when a S.W. gale, shifting to S.,
with heavy rain. About fifty Curlews were seen at Caldarvon, west
of this county, on March 11th, and three pairs on 17th (auct. Jas.
Lumsden).

Scolopacidæ (Waders).--Earliest spring migrants were Sandpipers and
Redshanks at Pentland Skerries on Feb. 9th (time of migration of
Thrushes, _q.v._); and on 17th, ditto. On April 27th a Purple Sandpiper
at Isle of May (No. 57 in spirits).

Autumn. Earliest July 20th, at Pentland Skerries, Redshanks; and a few
records of these and Sandpipers to 31st. In August a few records of the
same, and one Turnstone (identified) (No. 60 in spirits). In September
great flocks of Sandpipers flew in rays of light at 9 p.m.; light
E.N.E., and fog. In end of October and beginning of November Sandpipers
and Red-shanks participated in the rush of migrants at that time at
Pentland Skerries especially; light S.W. Large numbers on 5th; strong
N.W., and showers; and numbers up to 21st, all day; strong N.W. In
December, rushes on 12th; N.W. gale, snow; and up to 21st, very likely
local movements.

Sterninæ.--Records of either migration very scanty. First seen in
spring was at Pentland Skerries on May 13th, at 3.30 p.m.; light S.W.,
haze; and again at same place two seen flying north on June 20th. On
June 3rd, at Sumburgh Head, two; fresh W., cloudy. Lesser Terns arrived
at Cromarty on May 23rd.

In autumn, first record Aug. 7th, at Pentland Skerries, when those
breeding there all left, except one or two, with fresh N.W., clear. At
Bell Rock, on Sept. 19th, a flock kept flying round the rays of light
all night (_i.e._, 19th-20th); light E.N.E.; and on Sept. 27th one
immature bird appeared after a heavy gale from W. the previous night.
The above, I think, is the first occurrence I have of Terns flying
round and round within the rays of light of a lantern. Lesser Terns
disappeared from Cromarty on Aug. 26th; S.W., strong, clear.

Laridæ.--In spring, large numbers arrive about March 1st for breeding
purposes at Pentland Skerries, and leave about the middle of August. On
March 21st, at Isle of May, Kittiwakes arrived in large numbers at 9
a.m.--their first appearance; wind fresh E.S.E., cloudy and cold; and
by April 3rd had steadily increased in numbers. At Auskerry, May 18th
is given as first appearance of "Sea Maws"; strong N.W., and haze; and
a Black-headed Gull was seen, with light N.E. and clear, at Pentland
Skerries. At same station, record of two Black-backed Gulls on June
27th; fresh S.E., and haze completes spring records.

In autumn, at Pentland Skerries during July the daily movements of
Gulls may be worth reproducing in detail. All the July records I have
are from this station, and also all the August ones.

  1883, July 12, Pentland Skerries, one "Chaser" flying N.W., 2.15
     p.m.; light E., haze.

  July 18th, Pentland Skerries, three Black-backed Gulls flying N.,
     2.30 p.m.; mod. N.W.

  July 23rd, Pentland Skerries, one "Chaser" flying W., 10.20 a.m.;
     light N.

  July 25th, Pentland Skerries, continuous and large flocks of
     Herring Gulls flying round all day; N., clear.

  July 28th, Pentland Skerries, three "Chasers" (one flying E. at 3
     p.m., and one flying S. at 5 p.m.); mod. S.W., clear.

  July 29th, Pentland Skerries, one "Dirty Allan" seen. Aug. 6th,
     Pentland Skerries, large flock of young Gulls on rocks all day;
     light S., clear.

  Aug. 7th, Pentland Skerries, large flock of young Gulls on rocks,
     3.30 p.m.; fresh N.W.

  Aug. 20th, Pentland Skerries, one "Chaser" flying S.E., 12.50 p.m.;
     strong S.E., haze.

On 15th, at Dunnet Head, Gulls leave breeding-places in cliffs. Our
correspondent includes both "Chasers" and a "Dirty Allan," both of
which names I held as applicable to the commonest species of Skua; but
here they seem to be divided, as applying to two different species,
probably Richardson's (common) Skua and the Pomatorhine Skua.

"Dirty Allans" are again recorded from Isle of May, along with a rush
of small birds on Sept. 23rd; and in this case I doubt not Mr. Agnew
applies the name to Richardson's Skua. This is the only September
record. In October only two records at N. Unst; two pairs of Iceland
Gulls stayed two days, coming on the 4th with fresh N. and clear; and
two pairs more on 21st hovering round at 11 a.m.; fresh N., clear.

In November and December the greatest movements are noticed, which I
give in detail:--Nov. 2nd, Pentland Skerries, several Kittiwakes flying
S.E., noon; fresh S.W. Nov. 10th, Isle of May, thousands of Gulls (?);
W. gale, clear; first seen at 4 a.m., wind shifting to north. Nov.
11th, Isle of May, all the above gone; light N.W., clear. These may
have been Glaucous, from description, but this is not clear; and from
subsequent records I have preferred to consider them Herring, though
Mr. Agnew includes the latter later by name, I believe Mr. Agnew knows
the Glaucous and Iceland Gulls well. _Land Note._--There has not been
a large migration of Glaucous and Iceland Gulls at Kincardine on Forth
for many years.

  Nov. 17th, Isle of May, hundreds of Herring Gulls came from S.E.
     all day; light N.W. "Grey Gulls" mixed with Blackbacks, the
     latter one in twenty.

  Nov. 18th, Isle of May, every Gull gone; light N.W.

  Nov. 24th, Isle of May, hundreds of Herring Gulls came from S.E.
     all day; fresh W.; also accompanied by smaller numbers of
     Black-backs.

  Dec. 13th, Pentland Skerries, two Black-backed Gulls on island,
     12.30 p.m.; N.W. gale.

  Dec. 3rd, Isle of May, thousands of "Gulls," 3 p.m.; W., clear.

  1884, Jan. 22nd, Isle of May, large light-coloured Gulls with black
     tips to wings; gale W. last night.

_Note._--There is evidently considerable confusion existing regarding
the various species of Sea Gulls; and this is not to be wondered at
when the innumerable phases of plumage in even the same species,
according to maturity or immaturity, is considered. What is sadly
wanted in such a quest as ours is a series of cheap yet fairly well
executed plates of birds in all phases of plumage, with measurements to
scale; but the almost impossibility of issuing such at a sufficiently
low price for general distribution must, we fear, for ever debar our
correspondents from obtaining such a means of assistance. M. De La Rue
issues marvels of cheapness in Christmas Cards; could he not undertake
something in this line? His pictures of birds are admirable, but he
would have to keep up the standard, or even improve it, to be of
scientific value to us.

Procellariidæ.--Records scarce in spring and autumn. At Auskerry,
arrived for first time on July 30th, but as early as 6th eggs were laid
at Pentland Skerries. Being a bird of nocturnal habits, the arrival
cannot, we fancy, be easily fixed at all times. At Auskerry, on 8th,
two pairs had two eggs each (some notes on the schedule margin here
have been torn off and lost, J. A. H. B.) On Sept. 25th one struck at
Dunnet Head; S.S.W., fog; and on 26th six struck and rested from 9 to
11 p.m.; S.E. fresh, and haze. It is seldom so many are recorded at the
same time. Are these Pentland Skerries birds? At Noss Head, on Aug.
28th and on 30th, one Stormy Petrel each time struck, but not killed,
with W.N.W. fresh on former date, and light S.E. and haze on latter.

Alcidæ.--Spring. First visit at Isle of May on March 21st, when "not
very many" appeared, with fresh E.S.E. Guillemots and Razorbills. Next
visit at Isle of May, large numbers on April 1st with light W., and
in dear weather. Increased on 3rd, and on April 27th arrived again
finally, after a few days' absence, with fresh S.E. and haze. These
and other rock birds breeding here all left on Aug, 10th, except a few
Kittiwakes and Eider Ducks, after a heavy W. gale on 9th (see August,
below). Puffins were first observed at Isle of May; however, not before
May 4th, when a few showed.

Following this comes what may be considered local flights, in search of
food, to and from the fishing grounds:--

  May 16th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks flying E.; light
     breeze N.E.

  May 21st, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks flying E.; light W.,
     haze.

  June 4th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks flying S.E.; light
     N.E., haze.

  June 6th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks flying S.E.; light
     E., haze.

  June 17th to 20th, Pentland Skerries, continuous rush flying S.E.;
     strong N. to light E. and W.

  June 21st, Pentland Skerries, several flocks all day flying S.E.;
     lights.

  June 25th, Pentland Skerries, large flocks, 7.15 p.m., flying S.E.;
     fresh S.E., fog and rain.

  June 29th, Pentland Skerries, a few around; light S., clear.

We now come to the autumn movement, if we take the same dates as for
many land birds; but this is apt to be mixed up with the later summer
movements of old and young birds, and therefore we will keep July by
itself. All the records here relate, as before, to Pentland Skerries.
An equally exact record from each salient or conspicuous station
round our coasts could not fail to give us exact knowledge as regards
the movements of sea-fowl, or rather of rock birds. Food-supply is
an important factor in the local as well as the other migrations.
A knowledge of fishing-grounds would thereby be achieved; and a
knowledge of the two subjects, migration of birds and geography of the
distribution of fishes, would undoubtedly help each other. With these
remarks we continue our records for July, believing that this simple
tabular form is most useful in the present case, though cumbrous if
carried on in every instance.

_July debatable ground,_

  July 5th, Pentland Skerries, a flock 8.20 p.m.; mod. E., fog and
     showers.

  July 6th, Pentland Skerries, several flocks all day; light S., haze.

  July 7th, Pentland Skerries, several flocks all day flying E.; mod.
     S.E., haze.

  July 18th, Pentland Skerries, a few flocks all day; mod. N.W.,
     clear.

  July 25th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all day; mod. N.E.,
     clear.

  July 26th, Pentland Skerries, continuous flocks all day flying E.
     and S.E.; fresh N., haze.

The last two entries appear to me to indicate decision in commencing
the autumn migration.

  Aug. 15th, Dunnet Head, rock birds leave about this time.

  Aug. 10th, Isle of May, all rock birds left, except a few
     Kittiwakes; heavy westerly gale on 9th.

  Oct. 23rd, Pentland Skerries, flocks flying E.; strong W., showers.

  Nov. 2nd, Pentland Skerries, large flocks, noon, flying S.E. from
     S.W. (?).

  Nov. 27th, Isle of May, abundant in sea along with Gulls;
     "Garvies," _i.e._, _Culpea sprattus_, abundant (J. A. H. B.).

  Dec. 20th, Isle of May, large numbers; fresh W., haze.

  Dec. 27th, Isle of May, large numbers; S.W., haze.

This completes our data of Guillemots and Razorbills, to which the
whole of the above records refer for 1883; and I think it shows pretty
plainly the life-history of these birds, at least in some important
particulars. A wider appreciation can be arrived at if similar tabular
returns come in from other salient points of observation, such as Isle
of May, Bell Rock, and one or two stations on the east coast; and Cape
Wrath, Butt of Lewis, Monach Isles, and Barra Head on the west coast;
and also for summer migrations, especially such stations as Island
Ghlais, Skerryvore, and Dhuheartach, and others on the inner line of
stations of the west coast.

These data are minutely detailed here this year, because I have felt
more at liberty to do so, owing to the light returns of most of our
land birds, thus having more space than usual at command.

Further remarks, should such occur to us, will appear in the "General
Observations," which I withhold till the close of the West Coast
Report.




EAST COAST OF ENGLAND.


Printed schedules and letters of instruction were forwarded to
thirty-seven lighthouses and light-vessels on the East Coast of
England, and two stations in the Channel Islands, and returns have been
received from twenty-five, against thirty in 1882.

Independent reports have also been received from Heligoland, and
certain land stations along the East Coast, namely, Seaton-Carew,
Redcar, Flamborough, Spurn, North-East Lincolnshire, Wells (on the
Norfolk coast), Northrepps, Great Yarmouth, and the coast of Essex.
Making altogether a total of thirty-five reporting stations, against
thirty-seven in 1882.

Our best thanks are due to H. Gätke, T. H. Nelson, C. Donald-Thompson,
Matthew Bailey, William Eagle Clarke, J. H. Gurney, jun., M. Vaughan,
of Haileybury College, Arthur Patterson, and Colonel Russell, for their
hearty co-operation and assistance, as well as to the numerous kind and
painstaking observers at the lighthouses and light-vessels, whose names
are given in the list of stations. Special thanks are due to Mr. Gurney
for having inaugurated along the Norfolk coast a parallel system of
enquiry, which for a first trial has worked well. In all doubtful cases
of identity, where birds are killed against the lanterns, a wing is cut
off, and with a label of the date attached these have been forwarded
in batches to Mr. Gurney for identification, and with satisfactory
results. We cannot too strongly urge upon our observers the advantages
of this system, and advise them to adopt it; nothing is easier than to
cut off a wing from each victim on any given night, wrap them in paper,
or tie them together, with the dates attached, or numbered on the
cover, and send them in one parcel by post either to myself or to Mr.
Gurney, for identification. It is intended that instructions for doing
this will be given in the next issue of schedules in the spring of this
year.

The East Coast stations included in this report are as follows, those
making returns being marked with a star (*):--

  *Longstone L.H. +            Thomas O. Hall.
  *Inner Farn L.H.             Thomas H. Cutting.
  *Tees L.V.                   Henry Harbord.
   Coquet Island L.H.
  *Whitby High L.H.            John Odgers.
  *Flamborough Head L.H.       Charles Hood.
  *Spurn L.H.                  James B. Smith.
   Spurn (Newsand) L.V.
  *Outer Dowsing L.V.          William Stock & J. N. Utting.
  *Inner Dowsing L.V.          William King.
   Dudgeon L.V.
  *Llyn Wells L.V.             George Rees.
  *Hunstanton L.H.             William Westmoreland.
  *Cromer L.H.                 Richard Comben.
  *Leman and Ower L.V.         John Artis.
  *Hasbro' L.H.                By Mr. Gurney from G. H. Dunsford.
  *Hasbro' L.V.                J. Nicholas & B. Darnell.
  *Newarp L.V.                 C. Campbell & W. Rees.
  *Winterton L.H.              John Watson.
  *Cockle L.V.                 Samuel Pender & C. Prefrement.
   Orfordness L.H.
   Corton L.V.
  *Shipwash L.V.               The Principal.
  *Languard Point L.H.         Owen Boyle.
  *Galloper L.V.               The Principal: two batches of wings
                                 from Mr. Gurney.
   Kentish Knock L.V.
   Swin Middle L.V.
  *Tongue L.V.                 John Webber.
   Nore L.V.
   North Foreland L.H.
   Goodwin L.V.
  *Gull L.V.                   Francis Harvey & Joseph Jenkins.
  *South Sand Head L.V.        Joseph Ditcham.
  *Eastside L.V.               Edward le Gallais.
   South Foreland L.H.
   Casquets L.H., Alderney
  *Hanois L.H., Guernsey       Charles Williams.

  † For nature of light, position, and distances from the nearest land,
      see Report for 1880.


SEPARATE REPORT ON EACH SPECIES.[5]

[Footnote 5: The sequence and nomenclature are adopted from the
'List of British Birds,' compiled by a Committee of the British
Ornithologists' Union. London: John Van Voorst. 1883.]

_Turdus viscivorus_, Missel Thrush.--Great Yarmouth, Oct. 20th,
hundreds arriving; 23rd, one shot from flock coming in from sea.
Longstone L.H., 30th, several, and at intervals to Nov. 15th, many
being killed between these periods against lantern; on Nov. 4th, great
rush, coming all night. Great Cotes, N.E. Lincolnshire, Nov. 13th, very
numerous, fresh arrivals.

_T. musicus_, Song Thrush.--Spring, 1883, Farn L.H., Jan. 20th to Feb.
1st, Thrushes with Blackbirds and Fieldfares on island, also through
March and at intervals to May 10th, at which date several of each
and one Ring Ouzel were seen. Whitby L.H., March 9th, E.N.E., snow
squalls, many with Fieldfares and other birds apparently moving south.
Flamborough, April 27th, first Thrush struck, and on May 7th four. In
the autumn at Farn, Flamborough and Spurn, Sept. 21st, great flight;
and at the majority of the east coast stations from Farn Islands
to Hanois L.H., Guernsey, up to Nov. 8th; great rushes, with other
_Turdidæ_, Oct. 13th, and all through first week of November. Longstone
L.H., Jan. 2nd, 1884, during the snow-storm before daylight, many,
with Blackbirds and Redwings, round lantern--perhaps a local migration
from north to south.[6] Heligoland, from Sept. 21st, S.S.E., to Nov.
12th; greatest rushes on Sept. 24th, Oct. 13th, 29th, and first week in
November.

[Footnote 6: At the Farn L.H., on Feb. 20th, 1884, and four following
days, numbers of Fieldfares, Thrushes, and Blackbirds were seen on the
island; wind S.S.W.]

_T. iliacus_, Redwing.--Seaton Carew, Sept. 21st, to Hasbro' L.V., Oct.
30th, great many round lantern, and at several stations between these
dates; rushes Sept. 21st, Oct. 29th and 30th. Heligoland, Oct. 3rd to
Nov. 6th; greatest flights on Oct. 13th and Nov. 6th.

_T. pilaris_, Fieldfare.--First at Yarmouth, Sept. 8th, flock of ten
to fifteen, 6 a.m., travelling N.E. to S.W., very high,[7] to Hasbro'
L.V., Nov. 8th, many round lantern, and Nov. 16th, at Farn L.H., four
to S.W. At several stations in large numbers between these dates,
but none south of Yarmouth; rushes occurred on Sept. 21st, Oct. 19th
(Yarmouth, along coast to S.), 28th to 31st, and Nov. 6th to 8th. Inner
Dowsing L.V., Oct. 31st, seven killed, 7 p.m., N.E., and at Longstone
L.H., several on same night. Flamborough L.H., Nov. 9th, 1 a.m. to
daylight, great many; direction of migration N.E. to S.W. and E. to W.
or S.E. to N.W. Heligoland, from Sept. 24th to Nov. 7th; Oct. 28th,
great flight overhead, travelling E. to W.; from night of Oct. 31st to
Nov. 4th an immense migration day and night, on 6th also large numbers
still passing.

[Footnote 7: In the autumn of 1880 Fieldfares were first seen in
Norfolk on Sept. 9th, in 1881 on Sept. 14th, and in 1883 on Sept. 8th.
The earliest occurrence in each case for England.]

_T. varius_, White's Thrush.--Heligoland, April 15th, one all day long
(Sunday) in the churchyard, and was not obtained.

_T. merula_, Blackbird.--First at Redcar, Sept. 18th, a few, to Whitby
L.H., Nov. 11th, several, and at Tees L.V., Nov. 15th, one overboard;
between these dates at a majority of the stations, chiefly those
north of the Humber;[8] the first flights young birds, young cocks
being greatly in excess. On Oct. 19th, at Spurn, flight of old cock
Blackbirds; rushes occurred on Sept. 21st, Oct. 28th to 31st, and Nov.
2nd to 8th. Heligoland, Oct. 11th, some.

[Footnote 8: At Great Cotes, on Nov. 13th, sharp frost on previous
night; the hedgerows in the marsh swarmed with Blackbirds, Missel
Thrushes, Redwings, and Fieldfares; the former were young cocks with a
few old females. There was an average of one Blackbird to each lineal
six feet of hedge.]

_T. torquatus_, Ring Ouzel.--Spring, Hunstanton L.H., April 31st, one
male. Inner Farn L.H. May 10th, one. Flamborough L.H., May 7th, one
very fine old bird struck. Autumn, at several stations between the
Farn Islands and Yarmouth, from Oct. 13th at the former to Nov. 1st at
the Spurn, flock at noon, wind N.N.E., light, and Nov. 2nd and 4th,
Longstone L.H.; the latter dates all night. Cock Ring Ouzels were
tolerably plentiful near the Spurn and Kilnsea during the fourth week
in October; rushes on Oct. 13th and Nov. 1st to 4th. Heligoland, Sept.
30th to Oct. 22nd; on the 20th two old males.

                               Summary.

                                                     Rushes
                                            /---------------------------\
  Species.       Limit of Migration.  Days.  Sept.    Oct.         Nov.

  Fieldfare     Sept. 8th to Nov. 13th  67  21st  28th to 31st  6th to 8th
  Blackbird       "  18th to Nov. 15th  59  21st  30th to 31st  2nd to 8th
  Common Thrush   "  21st to Nov. 8th   49  21st      13th      2nd to 6th
  Redwing         "  21st to Oct. 30th  40  21st  29th to 30th      --
  Ring Ouzel    Oct. 13th to Nov. 4th   23   --       13th      1st to 4th
  Missel Thrush   "  20th to Nov. 15th  27   --       20th          4th

Heligoland.

  Fieldfare     Sept. 24th to Nov. 7th  45  24th  28th to 31st    to 4th
  Blackbird     Oct.  11th       --     --   --        --           --
  Common Thrush Sept. 21st to Nov. 12th 53  24th  13th & 29th    first week
  Redwing       Oct.  3rd  to Nov. 6th  35   --         13th        6th
  Ring Ouzel    Sept. 30th to Oct. 22nd 23   --  12th, 13th, 15th    --
  Missel Thrush       --          --    --

  Lines of migration, E. to. W., S.E. to N.W., and exceptionally from N.E.
    to S.W.

_Saxicola œnanthe_, Wheatear.--Spring, Farn L.H., April 2nd to 24th;
many on 14th. Flamborough, 5th, 1.20 a.m., one struck. Tees L.V., May
10th, twenty going from S.E. to N.W. Autumn, Farn L.H., from July 20th,
2 p.m., N.E., several, to Nov. 7th; Llyn Wells L.V., one struck (wing
sent to Mr. Gurney). In considerable numbers in September and October,
covering the whole coast line; in the former month associated, as
usual, with Redstarts. At the Farn and Longstone lighthouses, Sept.
2nd and 3rd, E., great numbers of both crossing, and on 24th with both
Redstarts and Snow Buntings. Heligoland, Aug. 6th to 7th, a few, S.E.
wind, and on to 20th numerous, all young; 21st to 24th, in astounding
numbers; Sept. 10th, enormous rush, and 11th and 12th, less.

_Pratincola rubetra_, Whinchat.--Heligoland, Aug. 21st, 22nd, and 24th,
great many young birds.

_P. rubicola_, Stonechat.--Spring, Whitby L.H., Feb. 23rd, one. Autumn,
same station, Aug. 8th, many to S. Spurn, Oct. 23rd, many. Stonechats
have frequented the sheep-folds on the turnip-fields in Lincolnshire
throughout the whole of the late mild winter. Heligoland, Oct. 20th,
one young bird; Oct. 11th, S.S.W., _P. rubicola_ (_indica_)? "with
coloration just like a young autumn Whinchat, if not lighter, all the
breast buff or isabell, the rump also."

_Ruticilla phœnicurus_, Redstart.--Spring, Hunstanton L.H., April
13th, 4 a.m., S., one male against lantern. Autumn, same station, Aug.
30th, one male, 1 a.m., against lantern. Numerous between Farn Islands
and Yarmouth in September to the 24th, associated frequently with
Wheatears. Heligoland, Sept. 9th to Oct. 1st; on Sept. 10th enormous
numbers, 14th great many, and 17th to 21st also great many.

_Ruticilla titys_, Black Redstart.--Spurn, Oct. 23rd, one seen (in 1882
at the Spurn, Oct. 29th). Galloper L.V., Oct. 28th, one, young male or
old female (wing to J. H. G.); I have no doubt it occurs regularly as
an autumn immigrant on our east coast, and may be expected about four
weeks later than the Redstart.[9] Heligoland, Oct. 27th, eight or ten.

[Footnote 9: Messrs. Clarke and Roebuck state, in their 'Handbook of
Yorkshire Vertebrata,' p. 19, that "Mr. M. Bailey, of Flamborough,
has frequently observed these birds in spring on their arrival on the
headland, and has known them killed by flying against the light in
thick, foggy weather, with the wind E.N.E. He has also seen them on
their departure in September, and has noticed several in October and
November."]

_Cyanecula suecica_, Red-spotted Bluethroat.--One, coast of
Northumberland late in September; one, Redcar, 21st, on Tees
breakwater; one about same time at the Spurn, but not obtained; ten,
coast of Norfolk, in same month; and about twenty others seen there
by a competent authority, Mr. Power. All obtained were birds of the
year.[10] The gizzard of one of these Norfolk birds which I examined
was crammed with the broken remains of small beetles having a bright
metallic lustre, but the remains were much broken and comminuted.

[Footnote 10: Mr. Gätke says "the other form, _S. leucocyanea_, Brehm,
comes very rarely so far north as Heligoland, and when it turns up
it always does so four to six weeks earlier than the suecica in the
spring."]

_Erithacus rubecula_, Redbreast.--First at the Shipwash L.V., Aug.
13th, large numbers associated with Wrens, to Llyn Wells L.V., Nov.
3rd, one killed; the main migration Sept. 10th to Oct. 14th, covering
the entire coast-line; rushes on Sept. 21st and 30th, Oct. 6th and 7th.
Heligoland, Sept. 24th to Nov. 23rd; rushes on Sept. 24th, and Oct. 3rd
to 7th.[11]

[Footnote 11: At the Spurn, in the autumn, I have seen Redbreasts come
in directly from the sea, passing overhead inland; an a clear bright
day the orange-red of the breast shows very conspicuously.]

_Sylvia cinerea_, Whitethroat.--Hanois L.H. (Guernsey), Nov. 2nd,
E., about lantern all night with Blackcaps. Heligoland, Sept. 10th,
enormous numbers; 11th and 12th, less; Oct. 1st, last.

_S. atricapilla_, Blackcap.--Hanois L.H., as above. Heligoland,
Oct. 11th, one young bird shot in garden. _S. hortensis_, Garden
Warbler.--Sept. 24th, some.

_Regulus cristatus_, Goldcrest.--Spring, Tees L.V., March 29th, one
stayed all night, then to E. Farn L.H., April 2nd, several all day.
Hunstanton L.H., 3rd and 4th, S., against lantern. Newarp L.V., 14th,
three to E. Autumn, Shipwash L.V., Aug. 13th, large numbers; and at
most stations between Sept. 2nd and Nov. 9th; rushes, Sept. 21st,
Oct. 28th to 31st. At the Shipwash L.V., on Oct. 15th, flights passed
westward from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m., and at 6 p.m. fourteen were killed at
lantern; the immigration of Goldcrests has been small compared with the
millions which crossed in the autumn of 1882, the period of migration
eighty-six days, against ninety-two in the preceding year; line E. to
W. Heligoland, Oct. 6th, not many yet; 7th, pretty numerous; 13th and
22nd, some. The Firecrest, _Regulus ignicapillus_.--Oct. 29th, many;
Nov. 2nd, many; 8th, some.

_Phylloscopus superciliosus_, Yellow-barred Warbler. Heligoland, Sept.
17th, N.E., calm and clear, one.

_P. rufus_, Chiffchaff.--Heligoland, Sept. 24th and 30th, some;
October, first seven days; 11th, early, great many and throughout day;
12th and 13th, less.

_P. trochilus_, Willow Warbler.--Aug. 14th, some; 18th, 19th, 20th,
pretty numerous, all young; 21st, 22nd, and 24th, astonishing numbers;
Sept. 9th, some; 10th, enormous numbers; 11th and 12th, less; 24th,
less; Nov. 1st, final rush, marvellous numbers.

_Hypolais pallida._--Heligoland, Sept. 20th, "first specimen got here,"
shot by Ludwig Gätke.

_Accentor modularis_. Hedgesparrow.--Languard Point L.H., March 1st,
12.30 p.m., large flock to E. In the autumn of 1882 there was an
enormous migration across Heligoland and on the East Coast of England;
this last autumn only five or six are recorded from Heligoland, and
none on our east coast.

_Acredula rosea_, British Long-tailed Titmouse.--Yarmouth, Oct. 25th,
about this date several seen, flock of eleven on telegraph wire, and
on the 22nd a furze-bush on the "denes" covered with them.

_Parus major_ and _cæridulus_, Great and Blue Titmouse.--Farn L.H.,
March 8th, two Tits. Flamborough, April 3rd, one struck. Farn L.H.,
Oct. 7th, two struck. Galloper L.V., 13th, one Great Tit (wing to J. H.
G.). Cockle L.V., 14th, both species. Shipwash L.V., 15th, two Great
Titmice (wings to J. H. G.). Spurn, 23rd, Blue Titmouse, a great many.
Heligoland, Great Titmouse from Oct. 14th to end of November; Oct. 29th
to 31st, a great many; Nov. 15th, same; Blue Titmouse from Oct. 14th
to Nov. 2nd; rush, Oct. 29th and 31st. _Parus ater_, Continental Coal
Titmouse.--Oct. 22nd, one.

_Troglodytes parvulus_, Wren.--Spring, Flamborough L.H., April 3rd,
9.20 p.m., one struck; May 7th, 11.45 p.m., one. Winterton L.H., May
14th, several, 12.30 a.m., S., three killed; 15th, two. Spurn L.H.,
24th, "large flock to south." Autumn, Shipwash L.V., Aug. 13th, 2 to
6.30 p.m., in large numbers. Tees L.V., Sept. 5th, one on board three
days. Whitby L.H., Oct. 10th, 8 a.m., Wrens to south. Cockle L.V., Nov.
1st, one. Outer Dowsing L.V., 2nd, great rush with others westward.
Heligoland, Oct. 31st, for several weeks past daily in great numbers;
Nov. 2nd, many; 7th and 8th, very many.

_Motacilla alba_, White Wagtail.--Heligoland, Oct. 12th and 13th, some.

_M. lugubris_, Pied Wagtail.--Spring, Whitby L.H., March 31st, two
pairs. Farn L.H., April 2nd, one; 4th to 14th, many. Flamborough, April
11th, a pair. Autumn, Cromer L.H., Aug. 12th, one Pied Wagtail (wing to
J. H. G.). Tees L.V., Sept. 17th, in flocks, twelve to fifteen. Whitby
L.H., Oct. 10th, last seen. Hanois L.H. (Guernsey), Oct. 29th, and on
Nov. 1st, all night.

_M. flava_, Blue-headed Yellow Wagtail.--Heligoland, Aug. 21st, 22nd,
and 24th, astonishing numbers; Sept. 2nd, some; Oct. 13th, some. _M.
citriola_, Sept. 16th, calm and fine, one.

_Anthus pratensis_, Meadow Pipit.--Heligoland, Sept. 24th, great many;
Oct. 1st, astounding numbers. _A. cervinus_, Sept. 16th, calm and fine,
one.

_A. trivialis_, Tree Pipit.--Heligoland, Aug. 21st, 22nd, and 24th,
astounding numbers; Sept. 2nd, some; 9th and 12th, many; 24th, ceased;
again, Oct. 12th and 13th, passing.

_A. richardi_, Richard's Pipit.--Heligoland, Sept. 16th and 17th; on
18th, two shot, 8½ in. long; 21st, some; 24th, some Oct. 11th, two.

_A. obscurus_, Rock Pipit.--October, last fortnight, common on
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk coast. At Heligoland, on Oct. 1st,
great many (_A. obscurus_, var. _rupestris_.[12])

[Footnote 12: This, the Scandinavian form of the Rock Pipit, is not
infrequent on the Yorkshire and Lincolnshire coast in the autumn.]

_Oriolus galbula_, Golden Oriole.--Heligoland, May, a male; the first
in thirty years.

_Lanius excubitor_ and _major_, Great Grey and Pallas's Great Grey
Shrike.--Heligoland, Oct. 5th, six or eight, and in last week in month
_major_, some; none on English coast.

_L. collurio_, Red-backed Shrike.--Languard L.H., March 16th, one. Farn
L.H., Sept. 23rd, one shot on island.

_Muscicapa grisola_, Spotted Flycatcher.--Spring, Whitby L.H., April
7th, great many small Flycatchers against lantern every night in the
week[13] (too soon by four or five weeks for _M. grisola_), Farn L.H.,
April 28th, several. Hunstanton L.H., May 17th, 2 a.m., S.W., seven
killed. Tees L.V., Dec. 27th, one came on board. Heligoland, Sept.
10th, enormous numbers; 11th and 12th, some; 17th, many; 19th and 20th,
less.

[Footnote 13: Probably this, as well as other entries in the schedules,
may refer to various small insect-feeding birds, as the term
"Flycatcher" amongst our observers is a very general one.]

_M. atricapilla_, Pied Flycatcher.--Yarmouth, Sept. 15th, one young
bird (J. H. G.). Heligoland, Aug. 14th, some, and on to Sept. 20th;
on Aug. 21st, 22nd, and 24th, and again on Sept. 10th, in enormous
numbers. _M. parva_, Red-breasted Flycatcher.--Sept. 19th, "one with
orange throat."

_Hirundo rustica_, Swallow.--Spring, Hunstanton L.H., April 5th,
one to S.W.; 29th, many. Farn L.H., 20th, two. In May, at Whitby,
Flamborough, Spurn, and Outer Dowsing L.V. At Tees L.V., on 10th, great
many, S.E. to N.W.; and 11th, 12th, and 13th, all through day in same
direction. Autumn, Cockle L.V., July 12th, six to S.; and from Sept.
25th to Oct. 13th, at several stations going south. Last observed at
the Spurn by myself, Oct. 24th and 25th; three young birds hawking in
the sun beneath Kilnsea cliff. Heligoland, Aug. 21st and 22nd, S.E.,
"astounding numbers" of Swallows, Martins, and Sand Martins; Sept.
3rd, S.S.W. (No. 9), great numbers; 4th, great flock of Swallows late
in afternoon; Nov. 8th, small flights.

_Chelidon urbica_, Martin.--Tees L.V., June 27th, 28th, 29th, great
many to S.W.; and at the Outer Dowsing L.V., on 23rd, two travelling
S.S.E. to W.N.W. Last observed at Seaton Snook, Tees, Oct. 2nd.

_Carduelis elegans_, Goldfinch.--Tees L.V., Nov. 22nd, one on board.
Heligoland, Nov. 8th, some.

_Chrysomitris spinus_, Siskin.--Yarmouth, Oct. 21st, small flights;
several taken by the birdcatchers. Heligoland, Oct. 27th, a few.

_Ligurinus chloris_, Greenfinch.--Spurn, Oct. 23rd and 24th, large
flocks near the coast associated with Linnets. Great Cotes, Nov. 16th,
small flights.

_Coccothraustes vulgaris_, Hawfinch.--Inner Dowsing L.V., Nov. 2nd, 9
p.m., one struck lantern; two at same station in 1882. Heligoland, Oct.
31st, Nov. 1st, many.

_Passer domesticus_, House Sparrow.--Spring, Outer Dowsing L.V., April
1st, 8 a.m., flock going S.E. by S. to N.W.; May 15th, six, and 18th
three to W.N.W.[14] Autumn, at several stations from Oct. 11th to Nov.
19th. Shipwash L.V., Nov. 8th and 17th, 8 a.m. to noon and 1 p.m.,
continuous flights to W.S.W.

[Footnote 14: All birds, including Crows, Sparrows, Tree Sparrows,
Chaffinches, Wrens, Swallows, Martins, Yellowhammers, Larks, Titlarks,
and some ducks, passing this station in March, April, May, and June,
were steering in _westerly_ directions. The Outer Dowsing L.V. is moored
on the edge of the shoal of that name 53 miles E.S.E. of the Spurn.]

_P. montanus_, Tree Sparrow.--Are recorded at Newarp L.V., Oct. 14th,
Yarmouth, 14th, and Shipwash L.V., 15th; and at the Goodwin stations in
October.[15]

[Footnote 15: As a rule more Common and Tree Sparrows pass the Goodwin
stations than any other on the east coast. These light-vessels, as
well as those off the mouth of the Thames, are very uniform in their
returns, the birds scheduled being the most abundant and commonest of
our immigrants, and it is seldom a rare visitor is chronicled.]

_Fringilla cœlebs_, Chaffinch.--Spring, Newarp L.V., April 13th, all
day to E. Farn L.H., 29th, several. Autumn, between Sept. 21st, at
Redcar, to Nov. 29th and 30th, at Longstone L.H., immense flights are
recorded at the majority of stations along the east coast; great rushes
occurred Sept. 21st, Oct. 6th to 14th, and Nov. 1st and 2nd; line of
flight E. to W.[16] Heligoland, from Sept. 21st, E. by S., to Nov. 1st,
in immense numbers; great rush on Sept. 21st and 22nd, on which latter
day they passed in astounding numbers; Oct. 13th, all day passing on;
Nov. 7th to 29th, great many.

[Footnote 16: Chaffinches are recorded as dying on board some of
the light-vessels, on which they arrive in an exhausted state. Mr.
Patterson, of Yarmouth, says, under date Oct. 13th, "Picked up some
dead at high-water mark. I have found numbers occasionally dead,
drowned thus, every year. They fare worse in this respect than most
small immigrants."]

_Fringilla montifringilla_, Brambling.--Longstone L.H., Sept. 21st, E.,
several. Cockle L.V., Oct. 11th, and Hasbro' L.H., 13th, two killed
(wings to J. H. G.). Heligoland, Oct. 7th, pretty numerous; 13th, all
day with Chaffinches; and numerous first week in November.

_Linota cannabina_, Linnet. Spring, Newarp L.V., April 13th, all day to
E. Autumn, Whitby L.H., Aug, 8th, great many to south.[17] Heligoland,
Sept. 30th to Nov. 11th; rush on Oct. 13th.

[Footnote 17: Linnets, Twites, and Redpoles work their way south along
the coast; those flocks also which cross the North Sea, after striking
land, follow the same route to the south. They often collect in immense
quantities in favourite localities, feeding on the seeds of salt-loving
plants along the coast.]

_L. linaria_, Mealy Redpole.--Spurn, a few during the second week in
February, 1884, and one on 15th near Yarmouth.

_L. rufescens_, Lesser Redpole.--Yarmouth, Oct. 15th, several about
"denes."

_L. flavirostris_, Twite.--Numerous flocks on Lincolnshire coast in
October. Heligoland, Oct. 22nd, hundreds together, and to Nov. 15th;
rush, Oct. 26th to Nov. 7th. _L. exilipes_, Nov. 11th, one.

_Pyrrhula europæa_, Bullfinch.--Newarp L.V., March 5th, one on board.
Outer Dowsing L.V., May 9th, one came on board, and ten to W.S.W.

_Loxia curvirostra_, Crossbill.--Heligoland, during first week in July,
repeated flights from twenty to thirty.

_Emberiza melanocephala_, Black-headed Bunting.--Heligoland, in May,
male and female obtained.

_E. miliaria_, Corn Bunting.--Heligoland, Oct. 13th, many; Nov. 2nd,
many; 7th, many; 23rd, some; "never seen here except in very small
flights."

_E. citrinella_, Yellowhammer.--May 13th, Whitby L.H., great many for
several days. Heligoland, Nov. 2nd, many; 23rd, some. _E. cirlus_, Cirl
Bunting.--May, one, "completing with the male obtained many years ago,
the only pair."

_E. hortulana_, Ortolan Bunting. Great Cotes, May 3rd, N.E., very sharp
and cold, one seen, apparently an adult female [see Cordeaux, Zool.,
vol. 1883, p. 253.] Heligoland, Aug. 21st, 22nd, and 24th, "astounding
numbers"; Sept. 9th and 12th, great many; 16th and 17th, first old
birds. _E. rustica_, Rustic Bunting, Sept. 24th, one shot by Ludwig
Gätke. _E. pusilla_, Little Bunting, Sept. 24th, one shot; 30th, one.

_E. schœniclus_, Reed Bunting.--Great Cotes, Nov. 16th, considerable
flight. Heligoland, Sept. 20th, pretty large numbers; Oct. 11th, great
many; 13th, some; and 31st, many.

_Calcarius lapponicus_, Lapland Bunting.--Heligoland, Sept. 30th, some.

_Plectrophanes nivalis_, Snow Bunting.--Spring, Farn L.H., March 7th,
two. Cockle L.V., 14th, "Snow-birds" to W. Languard L.H., July 8th,
a pair on beach, 6.30 p.m., seen by Mr. Owen Boyle; certainly the
earliest record for England of this species. Autumn, first at Tees
L.V., Sept. 18th and 19th, one flock each day to S.W., and to Jan. 9th,
1884. Redcar, several flights to W.; a few recorded at stations between
the Farn Islands and Yarmouth in September, October, and November; and
from Dec. 1st to 29th in great numbers. At Great Cotes, on Dec. 4th,
thousands upon thousands, the stubbles near the Humber fairly covered
with their enormous flocks; young with a sprinkling of old birds, one
to forty. Heligoland, Nov. 6th, early, very numerous passage; 12th and
14th, great many.

_Sturnus vulgaris_, Common Starling.--With few exceptions are recorded
at all our east coast stations, and often in immense numbers, the
occurrences being far too numerous to chronicle. The bulk crossed in
September, October, and November; less in December; the line of flight
and rushes corresponding with those of the Lark, with which species
they are very frequently associated. Heligoland, from Oct. 1st to Nov.
12th; on Oct. 6th in "astounding flights, thousands upon thousands";
12th, "considerable numbers of astounding flights, both overhead and
in distance"; 13th, "still passing, astounding numbers all day"; 26th,
the same, very high; 27th, "night, from 11 p.m., myriads"; 28th,
"immense," and still great many to Nov. 12th. These extracts from
Mr. Gätke's notes show the enormous migration of this species across
Heligoland in the autumn, and the corresponding rush on to our east
coast.

_Pastor roseus_, Rose-coloured Pastor.--Heligoland, July 16th, old male
shot.

_Pyrrhocorax graculus_, Chough.--Heligoland, April 15th, seen for a
whole week, but not obtained.

_Corvus monedula_, Jackdaw.--Considerable numbers south of Humber
throughout the autumn. Heligoland, Oct. 26th, many; 27th and 29th,
great flight.

_Corvus corone_, Carrion Crow.--Spring, Farn L.H., March 8th, seven to
W. Autumn, Yarmouth, Oct. 14th, continuous flocks of Carrion and Grey
Crows coming in, and again on 27th. At the Inner Dowsing L.V., from
Oct. 25th to Nov. 13th, great many; also at other stations in October
and November.

_Corvus cornix_, Hooded Crow.--Migrates in company with his near
cousin, the Carrion Crow, as well as in separate flocks.[18] Spring,
Farn L.H., May 25th, one Grey Crow on island, where it ate three young
Larks; on July 27th Mr. Owen Boyle saw five on the beach off Languard.
Autumn, first at Great Cotes, Oct. 4th, to Whitby L.H., Dec. 8th,
fifty. Enormous numbers crossed in October and November between the
Farn Islands and Shipwash L.V., off the coast of Essex, the main body
arriving on the flat coast of Lincolnshire and in Norfolk; great rushes
occurred on Oct. 9th, night of 12th, 20th, 27th, and 28th, and on to
Nov. 2nd, and also Nov. 7th to 15th; under date Nov. 8th, Hasbro' L.V.
reports "continuous flocks of Black Crows and Grey Crows, and Crows
with white backs and bellies"; it would be difficult to say what is
intended by the latter. Heligoland, Oct. 1st, flights, thirty to forty,
to Nov. 12th.[19]

[Footnote 18: Probably something like one-half of the entries in the
schedules record the movements of Crows, Rooks, Daws, Starlings, Larks,
and Chaffinches, any detailed notice of which is unnecessary, and could
serve no practical purpose.]

[Footnote 19: Under date Oct. 6th, N.E., clear, fresh, Mr. Gätke
remarks:--"Across the sea both sides of island (N. and S.),
particularly on north side, countless numbers of _cornix_, _sturnus_,
and all kinds of small birds, all from E. to W. This occurrence happens
not rarely; during this ponderous migration there were on the island
nearly no birds."]

_Corvus frugilegus_, Rook.--Spring, Newarp L.V., during March and
April, many flocks of Rooks and Crows are recorded as going both to the
west and east, as if a cross migration was going on to and from the
Continent. At the Cockle L.V., March 20th, 24th, and 26th, continuous
Rooks and Crows to _west_. Llyn Wells, April 30th, various flocks of
Crows to _south-west_, and at the same station, on Aug. 3rd and 4th,
large flocks to _north north-east_. Autumn, with scarcely an exception,
at all stations between the Spurn and South Foreland, from the last
week in September to the end of the third week in November; the rushes
correspond with those of the preceding.

_Alauda arvensis_, Sky Lark.--As in previous years. Larks hare crossed
in immense numbers to the east coast; it would be quite unnecessary
to give each occurrence in detail, almost involving the necessity of
writing a separate report. They are recorded at all stations from the
Farn Islands to Gull L.V., off the South Foreland, from Sept. 1st to
Jan. 3rd, 1884, and often continuously night and day; rushes took
place on Sept. 3rd, 4th, and 21st, Oct. 6th and 8th, 10th to 14th,
27th to Nov. 2nd-14th; and Dec. 27th and 30th; and again Jan. 3rd,
1884. Flocks which come in at daybreak will continue to arrive till
12 or 1 p.m., when migration for the time ceases. Numbers are killed
during the night migration against the lanterns of the lighthouses and
light-vessels.[20] Heligoland, Oct. 5th to Nov. 8th; great rushes,
Oct. 12th; 27th, night from 11 p.m., "milliards" with Starlings; 28th,
"immense flight"; 30th and 31st, in all four nights almost continuous
flights.

[Footnote 20: The list of birds killed at the Hasbro' L.V., from Oct.
10th to Jan. 3rd 1884, was 162 Sky Larks, 73 Starlings, 23 Chaffinches,
60 Larks and Chaffinches, 28 Stormy Petrels, 1 Fork-tailed Petrel, 3
Fieldfares, 3 Thrushes, 8 Ringed Plovers, 4 Grey Plovers, 2 Goldcrests,
2 Woodcocks, 1 Whimbrel, 1 Oystercatcher, 1 Kingfisher, 1 Blackbird,
1 Grey Crow, 1 Rook, 1 Lapwing, 1 tame Pigeon, 1 Curlew, 1 Brambling,
1 Redwing (wings sent to Mr. Gurney, but without date). Besides these
a large tub and bucket-full various. At Llyn Wells L.V., under date
Oct. 17th, Kestrel, Snow Bunting, Chaffinch, 2 Robins, Wren, Goldcrest;
on Nov. 4th, 3 Knots, 4 Thrushes, Redwing, 3 Stormy Petrels; Nov.
7th, 8 Chaffinches, 7 Thrushes, Knot, Blackbird, Wheatear, 2 Dunlins,
2 Snow Buntings, Brambling, Jack Snipe, 4 Fieldfares; another date,
2 Chaffinches, 2 Tree Sparrows, Thrush, 3 Stormy Petrels, 2 Snow
Buntings, Dunlin; Nov. 2nd, 5 Knots; Dec. 20th, Knot; Jan. 2, Knot;
6th, 2 Knots; 7th, Oystercatcher; also two more Knots and two Dunlins,
which had slipped their labels, but which Mr. Gurney thinks belong to
Nov. 22nd.]

_Otocorys alpestris_, Shore Lark.--Yarmouth, between Oct. 25th and
28th, six obtained from a small flock. Galloper L.V., October 11th,
one, (wing to J. H. G.). At Heligoland the migration of the Shore Lark,
commencing on Oct. 1st and ending Dec. 16th, was the most remarkable
of the season; Oct. 1st, N.E., small flights; 11th, some flights;
13th, about one hundred; 22nd, flights of hundreds; 26th, flights of
thousands, in the forenoon cliff covered; 27th-30th, numerous; Nov.
7th, marvellous numbers; 8th, very numerous; 11th, many flights; 12th,
astounding numbers; 14th, numerous; 15th, astonishing, thousands in
flights; 16th, few; Dec. 16th, hundreds.

_Cypselus apus_, Swift.--Hunstanton L.H., May 10th, great many. Whitby
L.H., 13th, one. Farn L.H., June 25th, three; the movement southward
appears to have commenced on or about this date. Last at Yarmouth,
Sept. 8th, several all day. Heligoland, August 21st, 22nd, and 24th,
great many.

_Jynx torquilla_, Wryneck.--Heligoland, Aug. 21st, 22nd, and 24th,
immense numbers with Swallows, Martins, Sand Martins, Swifts, Ortolan
Buntings, Tree Pipits, Wheatears, Willow Wrens, Pied Flycatchers, and
Blue-headed Wagtails; all astounding numbers.

_Alcedo ispida_, Kingfisher.--Yarmouth, first fortnight in September,
twenty-three brought to one birdstuffer. Hasbro' L.V., Oct. 10th, 10.30
p.m., one on deck. Heligoland, Aug. 15th.

_Coracias garrula_, Roller.--Bradwell, Norfolk, Oct. 9th, one shot.
Muckton, Louth, Lincolnshire, Oct. 27th, one also shot.

_Upupa epops_, Hoopoe.--Longstone L.H., April 29th, one killed against
kitchen window, 2.15 a.m., rain and squalls from S.E.

_Cuculus canorus_, Cuckoo.--Hunstanton and Whitby lighthouses. May
12th, one at each. Farn L.H., 15th, one. Longstone L.H., July 24th,
young Cuckoo on rocks. Heligoland, Aug. 19th and 20th, three young.

_Strix flammea_, Barn Owl.--One at Cromer, on Oct. 6th., seen by Mr.
Gurney, and "a large cream-coloured Owl," at Farn L.H., on May 13th,
may have belonged to this species.

_Asio otus_, Long-eared Owl.--Cromer, Oct. 6th, one. Hasbro' L.V. Nov.
4th, one resting on rigging at 7.30. a.m. for ten minutes, and perhaps
Whitby, Jan. 3rd, 1884, "one very large Horned Owl seen on cliff top."
Heligoland, Oct. 31st and Nov. 1st, pretty numerous.

_A. brachyotus_, Short-eared Owl.--Spring, Farn L.V., April 25th,
7.45, p.m., "one very large Owl to E.N.E.; very high." Autumn, first
at Redcar, Sept. 11th to Dec. 20th. At Llyn Wells L.V., two to S.S.W.;
throughout October to Nov. 8th, at eleven stations;[21] rushes Oct. 1st
to 4th, 12th to 14th, and first week in November. Heligoland, Oct. 14th
and 15th, one each day; 22nd, numerous; 24th, some; 30th, great many;
31st, numerous. Nov. 1st to 4th, "and at night at the lighthouse, many,
also our smaller Owl, _tengmalmi_."

[Footnote 21: Under date of Nov. 7th, at Happisburgh L.H., an Owl,
flying about in the glare of the lamps, was seen to pounce on a
Starling and carry it off. Mr. F. Spurr writes, "this latter, a fine
Horned Owl, has taken to visit the lighthouse regularly; he takes his
post just beneath the strong rays of light, and from thence pounces on
the small birds when they are frightened by the glare." He goes on to
say that he had seen it perched on the rail of the balcony, when its
eyes shone like living coals; just such a light as is visible in the
eyes of the night-flying moths when they settle on the pane.]

Falconidæ.--Circus, Harrier, Redcar, Sept. 21st, six on Tees
Breakwater. Buzzards or "very large Hawks," Spring, Farn L.H., March
10th, "one large Hawk, feeding on Blackbird"; May 18th, large Hawk;
June 18th, very large Hawk, driving the Terns from their nesting-place;
also on 19th. Autumn, from Sept. 6th to Jan. 12th, 1884, numerous
Buzzards, and "very large Hawks" are recorded at ten stations between
the Farn Islands and Yarmouth; the majority between Sept. 6th and Oct.
20th. There appears to have been a rush of the larger _Falconidæ_ on
Sept. 21st. At the Spurn L.H., on Sept. 21st, two Common Buzzards;
14th, 1 a.m., Honey Buzzard caught against lantern, and another on
17th, shot near Kilnsea. Farn L.H., 23rd, one very large Hawk, "back
and wings dark brown, belly greyish white, beak slate-colour." Whitby
L.H., Jan. 12th, 8.30. a.m., one very large Hawk, "dark colour, with
long, square tail, the largest I have ever seen." _Accipiter nisus_,
Sparrowhawk, numerous through September and to Oct. 14th, and after
this in less numbers to Nov. 20th; rush, Sept. 21st, with other
_Falconidæ_. Heligoland, Rough-legged Buzzard, Oct. 12th and 13th, one
each day; Nov. 2nd, some; 19th, four to six. Sea Eagle, _Haliaëtus
albicilla_, Sept. 21st, some. Sparrowhawks, from Sept. 21st to Nov.
1st.; Oct. 4th, first old birds. As a rule Sparrowhawks pass late in
the afternoon. Peregrine Falcon, Oct. 12th, a few. Kestrel and others,
Sept. 22nd, "more than ever, with Sparrowhawks and Merlins."

_Phalacrocorax carbo_, Cormorant.--Tees L.V., March 7th, flock of
twenty-five; 24th, fifty.

_Sula bassana_, Gannet.--Spring, Farn L.V., Feb. 25th, many going N.
Longstone L.H., March 22nd to April 15th, daily to N., and from this
date every day till May 30th, never more than nine in a flock; great
numbers of young also seen off Farn Islands, Redcar and Whitby, first
three weeks, in October, generally moving in northerly directions.
Redcar, Oct. 26th and 31st and Nov. 2nd and 10th, great numbers to S.E.
Hanois L.H. (Guernsey), Nov. 24th, all day passing.

_Ardea cinerea_, Heron.--Languard L.H., June 25th, a pair very high to
S.W., and several seen off Farn L.H. in August.

_Botaurus stellaris_, Bittern.--Early in January, 1884, a Bittern was
shot near Thornton College, North Lincolnshire, and two others are
reported as seen.

Anser, Geese.--Languard L.H., March 11th, sixteen Grey Geese, very high
to S.W. Whitby L.H., June 20th, nineteen going N., and on July 8th, 5
p.m., a large flock from N. to S.W. Redcar, Sept. 21st, twelve Grey
Geese to E.; and at some stations also in October and November, having
probably reference to change of feeding-ground. A large flock of Brent
Geese, _Bernicla brenta_, were seen off the Farn Islands on March 23rd,
at 6 p.m., and in the autumn a few on Sept. 26th, at the Tees L.V.

Cygnus, Swans.--At Tees L.V., March 25th, one. Outer Dowsing L.V.,
14th, three from N.W. to E.S.E. Spurn, May 13th, three to S.; and on
15th, two in Humber. Llyn Wells L.V., Sept. 16th, three to W.S.W. It is
possible all these may have reference to escapes or strays from private
waters.

_Tadorna cornuta_, Common Sheldrake.--Tees L.V., Jan. 13th, flock of
three hundred. "Never saw so many together before." Nov. 28th, flock of
about one hundred.

_Mareca penelope_, Wigeon.--Redcar, Aug. 20th, two flocks; Sept. 20th,
flock of one hundred Teal at sea. Farn L.H., Dec. 12th, hundreds of
Wild Duck, _Anas boschas_, off island.

_Harelda glacialis_, Long-tailed Duck.--Farn L.H., March 8th, "flock
of fifty to sixty off island." On Oct. 23rd, at Kilnsea, near the
Spurn, I shot a mature female Hareld from a flooded meadow. The stomach
contained a mass of small red worms and minute stones.

_Somateria mollissima_, Eider Duck.--Farn L.H., Nov., "hundreds of
Eiders, drakes and ducks, with young birds, flying and swimming about
the island every day this month." In December six were shot on Breydon
Water, Norfolk. The King Eider, _Somateria spectabilis_, was again, as
in the last two years, seen at the Farn Islands, in company with the
Common Eider, in April.

_Œdemia nigra_, Common Scoter.--Gull L.V., Aug. 19th to Sept. 11th,
great numbers going S.W.

_Columba palumbus_, Ring Dove.--Farn L.H., Sept. 24th, one. Stock Dove,
_C. ænas_.--On Oct. 25th, at Kilnsea, near the Spurn, I saw one come in
direct from the sea and pitch in a field on the cliff top. Heligoland,
_C. palumbus_, Sept. 30th, some; Oct. 4th, flights, forty to fifty;
13th and 15th, passing on; 31st, many.

_Rallus aquaticus_, Water Rail.--Farn L.H., Oct. 30th, S., foggy, three
at daylight; Nov. 2nd, one at noon, to land; Galloper, 3rd, one (wing
to J. H. G.) Hasbro' L.H., Dec. 9th, S.W., one struck.

_Crex pratensis_, Corn Crake.--Farn L.H., May 1st, 3 p.m., N.E., one;
23rd, 2 p.m., one. Whitby, 11th, first heard. Winterton L.H., Aug.
10th, midnight, one struck. Spurn L.H., Sept. 15th, one; Hunstanton
L.H., Oct. 8th, one struck and caught alive.

_Œdicnemus scolopax_, Stone Curlew.--Heligoland, Aug. 15th.

_Charadrius pluvialis_, Golden Plover.--Farn L.H., July 27th, five to
E., and on Aug. 20th, flock to W.; numerous on island through August
and September, moving to and from the mainland. At the Spurn on Aug.
29th, a large flock to N.[22]; and at Wells, Norfolk, Aug. 27th, in
small parties on mud. Heligoland, July. 16th, one young bird shot; Aug.
21st to 24th, young birds; 16th and 17th, great flights, all young;
29th, great flights; night Oct. 31st to Nov. 1st, "whole atmosphere
gloomy darkness, Curlew, Lapwing, Tringa, Snipe, Woodcock, but no
Golden Plover." Dec. 4th, N.E. (No. 8 or 9), snow-storm. Woodcocks and
Golden Plover.

[Footnote 22: The occurrence of a large body of Golden Plovers at
the Spurn at this date, passing to the north, is somewhat remarkable
in connection with the large flight of the same species seen there,
passing in the same direction, on Aug. 22nd, in 1880, and on Sept. 6th
in 1881. (Yarrell's Brit. Birds, ed. iv., vol. iii., p. 274).]

_Squatarola helvetica_, Grey Plover.--Spurn, June 7th, 11 a.m., N.E.,
flocks along coast. Hasbro' L.V., Nov. 1st, four killed. Tees L.V.,
Dec. 13th, large flock.

_Vanellus vulgaris_, Lapwing.--Spring, Cockle L.V., March 8th, large
flocks to S.W. Autumn, Yarmouth, Oct. 6th, large flocks in afternoon
from sea; 30th, Hasbro' L.V., great rush; Whitby L.H., Nov. 15th, 16th
and 17th, flights each day, south-westerly gale; also at Hunstanton
L.H. on 16th, to S.W., from daylight to noon.

_Strepsilas interpres_, Turnstone.--Yarmouth, Aug. 11th, young birds
to S. Farn L.H., 14th, large flocks at noon. Redcar, 31st, large flock
near Teesmouth, fresh arrivals.

_Hæmatopus ostralegus_, Oystercatcher.--Llyn Wells L.V., Jan. 7th,
1884, one killed (J. H. G.).

_Phalaropus hyperboreus_, Red-necked Phalarope.--Yarmouth, Oct. 24th,
one shot.

_Scolopax rusticula_, Woodcock.--Flamborough L.H., April 6th, struck
and killed. Two or three occurred at Teesmouth (Redcar), last week
in August, and a few in September. At Seaton Snook and Flamborough
on Sept. 21st. The "first flight" was on the Yorkshire, Lincolnshire
and Norfolk coasts, on the night of Oct. 21st, wind N.E. The "great
flight," or rush, on the nights of Oct. 28th and 29th, covering the
whole of the E. coast, from the Farn Islands to Yarmouth, the bulk
coming probably into the Humber district. A friend wrote me he had shot
eighteen on the morning of 29th, and might easily have doubled this
number if he had started early enough. From the 2nd to the 10th of
November stragglers continued to arrive between the Farn Islands and
Yarmouth. Heligoland, Sept. 22nd, first; Oct. 22nd, one hundred caught
or shot; 28th, astounding passage of Larks, Starlings, Peewits, Snipes
and Woodcocks; Oct. 30th, twenty to thirty shot; 31st, ten to twenty
shot; 31st to Nov. 1st, thirteen caught, a few stragglers to December
4th.[23]

[Footnote 23: Mr. Clubley, of Kilnsea, near the Spurn, who during his
life has probably shot more Cock than anyone living on the east coast,
says that a S.E. wind always brings _large grey_ or _light-coloured_
Woodcocks, a N. wind _small_ and _red-coloured_ birds--that is,
Scandinavian birds. This rule seems to hold good on other parts of our
east coast. See also remarks by Mr. J. Harvie-Brown.]

_Gallinago major_, Great Snipe.--N. E. Lincolnshire, Oct. 2nd, one
shot; Yarmouth, same date, one.

_G. cælestis_, Common Snipe.--Yarmouth, Aug. 11th, several. Great
Cotes, Sept. 25th, first considerable flight, wind S.E. night of 24th,
with gale and heavy rain. Hasbro' L.H., Nov. 8th, two struck and
killed. Heligoland, Oct. 22nd, great flight; 28th, night, immense.

_Limnocryptes gallinula_, Jack Snipe.--Farn. L.H., Sept. 21st, S.E.,
noon, two. Galloper L.V., Nov. 3rd, one (J. H. G.) Llyn Wells L.V.,
7th, one (J. H. G.)

_Tringa alpina_, Dunlin.--Languard L.H., March 10th, 7.40 a.m., very
large flock, very rapidly to N. _T. minuta_, Little Stint, Bridlington,
Aug. 3rd, two seen (W. E. C.), and at Yarmouth, second week in
September, three.[24]

[Footnote 24: The first great rush of _Tringæ_ across Heligoland was
Aug. 6th and 7th; 14th also, all sorts; and on 21st and 22nd, same;
again on night of Oct. 31st, and morning of Nov. 1st.]

_T. subarquata_, Curlew Sandpiper.--Essex coast, August 1st, Colonel
Russell shot three from a flock of Oxbirds; they were in partial moult;
another was seen.

_T. striata_, Purple Sandpiper.--Farn L.H., May 15th, 6 p.m., S.S.E.,
very large flock flying over island; and at the same station, on Nov.
28th, very large flocks of Turnstone, Purple Sandpiper and Redshank.
Yarmouth, Oct. 5th, five seen.

_T. canutus_, Knot.--Spurn, June 13th, flock arrived from S. The first
Knots in the autumn were seen at Yarmouth and Redcar on Aug. 11th, and
by the end of the month were tolerably numerous along the east coast.
Llyn Wells L.V., Sept. 22nd, N.N.E., large flocks to S. all day; at
this station also, from Oct. 20th to Jan. 6th, 1884, twenty-eight were
killed against the lantern.[25]

[Footnote 25: The Knot at Blakeney is always called "Knet"; Godwit, a
"Pick"; Dunlin, "Stint"; Whimbrel, "May-bird"; Turnstone, "Dotterel";
Ringed Plover, "Oxbird." On the Essex coast the Whimbrel is a
"May-bird" or "Titterel," the latter from its cry; Godwits are "Pream;"
Knot, "Marl"; Dunlin, "Oxbird"; Ringed Plover, "Stone-runner." At
Spurn the Knot is a "Plover-knot," but on the Lincolnshire coast
simply a "Knot". Local names, common to both sides of the Humber,
are, Turnstone, "Dotterel"; Common Dotterel, "Land Dotterel," "Spring
Dotterel"; Grey Plover, "Pigeon," or "Buffel-headed Plover"; Dunlin,
"Stint," or "Tommy Stint"; Ringed Plover, "Sand-runner"; Whimbrel,
"Curlew-jack"; Godwit, "Curlew-whelp." On the Durham coast the Knot
is both a "Dunlin" and "Grey Plover"; Dunlin, a "Stint"; Sanderling,
"White Stint"; Whimbrel, "Curlew-jack"; Lapwing, a "Tyafit"; Godwit,
"Goodwin." The local names of birds vary so in different districts that
they frequently become very puzzling to the members of the Committee;
it would greatly assist their labours and facilitate enquiry if any
fellow-worker would take the trouble to compile a glossary of local
names of our British birds. The investigation might be rendered easy
by sending printed forms to the best known ornithologists, in their
respective districts. The results could not fail to be both useful and
interesting.]

_Machetes pugnax_, Ruff.--Yarmouth, second week in September, five
ruffs and one reeve.

_Calidris arenaria_, Sanderling.--Flamborough, Aug. 3rd, old male in
summer plumage (W. E. C.). Yarmouth, 11th, Knots and Sanderlings on
beach. Spurn, Oct. 23rd, a few.

_Totanus glareola_, Wood Sandpiper.--Bridlington, middle of August,
a young bird was shot on South Sands (W. E. C.). Spurn, middle of
September, three, all immature, taken to Mr. P. Lawton, of Easington.

_T. calidris_, Redshank.--Outer Dowsing L.V., May 9th, one "Red-legged
Sandpiper" on deck, then to W. Wells, Norfolk, Aug. 28th, numerous; one
hundred or more in a flock. Tees L.V., Sept. 23rd, large flock. Farn
L.V., Nov. 28th, very large flocks with Purple Sandpiper and Turnstone
on rocks. _T. fuscus_, Spotted Redshank, Breydon, Oct. 20th, one shot.

_T. canescens_, Greenshank.--Wells, Norfolk, Aug. 27th, "comparatively
numerous." Yarmouth, Aug. 9th, four shot, all immature. Sept. 2nd, two.

_Limosa lapponica_, Bar-tailed Godwit.--Redcar, July 28th, and forward
to Aug. 27th, in some numbers.

_Numenius phæopus_, Whimbrel.--Redcar, July 18th, N.E. light, first
passing over, very high. Yarmouth, Aug. 1st, all day. Redcar, 8th,
S.W. strong, two large flocks of fifty; 23rd and 24th, rush, and at
intervals to Sept. 10th.

_N. arquata_, Curlew.--Farn L.H., March 11th, 5 to 6 p.m., four to five
hundred to island from mainland in flocks from five to thirty. Whitby
L.H., June 20th, great many night and day. Winterton L.H., Sept. 10th,
12.30 a.m., one caught beating against lantern, great many during
night to W. Farn L.H., Nov. 17th, large flock to E. Hasbro' L.V., Jan.
3rd, 1884, one killed. Heligoland, Oct. 30th and 31st, great many with
_Tringa_ and _Scolopax_, _Limosa_ and _Vanellus_; and night of 31st,
great rush.

Sterninæ, Terns.--Spurn, May 4th, all day to north. At the Farne Islands
the Arctic Terns, _Sterna macrura_, returned to their nesting quarters
on May 20th, and left again on Aug. 3rd, only a few being seen after
that date. Yarmouth, Aug. 7th to 10th, Black, Common, and Arctic Terns
along shore, and through the month to 31st; in shore only when wind is
westerly, in flocks of ten to fifty, nine-tenths being young; it is the
westerly winds which bring in the herring "syle," on which the Terns
feed. The Sandwich Tern, _Sterna cantiaca_, arrived at the Farn Islands
between April 15th and 23rd, leaving again on Aug. 3rd. At Languard
Point, Mr. Owen Boyle saw on June 1st, 4.45 a.m., a pair of Roseate
Terns; 7th, four Sandwich Terns; 15th, four Lesser Terns; and on 23rd,
four Common Terns. At Redcar, on Sept. 5th, 6th, 7th, and 10th, many
flights were heard passing over in dark.

Larinæ, Gulls.--Whitby L.H., Feb. 15th, Herring Gulls returning to
cliffs; July 18th, first young on wing; Aug. 14th, Gulls, old and
young, left the cliff. Farn L.H., April 14th, Lesser Black-backed
Gulls returning to nesting quarters. Yarmouth, Aug. 10th, Gulls,
mostly young, along shore feeding on "syle," five to thirty in flock.
Flamborough, Sept. 12th, great many Gulls all day to south. Spurn,
Sept. 24th, two hundred Herring Gulls to south. Cockle L.V., Oct. 25th,
great many large Gulls, young and old, E. to W.; Nov. 17th to 23rd,
9.30 a.m. to 3 p.m., Great Black-backed Gulls from W. to E. Farn L.H.,
Nov. 8th to 30th, very large number of Black-headed Gulls fishing round
island at flood each day; Dec. 8th, two "Bass" Gulls; 12th, one. "These
Gulls are all cream-colour. I am not sure if they are the Glaucous, so
have given them the local name." At Heligoland, young Glaucous Gulls,
_L. glaucus_, were repeatedly seen about island in December; and during
the last week in January, 1884, hundreds of Black-headed Gulls, _L.
ridibundus_, frequented the plateau of cliff, which Mr. Gätke says is a
"very exceptional" circumstance there. _Xema sabinii_, Sabine's Gull,
an immature example was shot on. Oct. 28th, the second example which
has been obtained there; and on Nov. 10th a second young bird was seen
by Aeuckens, the birdstuffer.

Stercorariinæ, Skuas.--Redcar, Aug. 25th, two; Teesmouth, 27th,
Richardson's Skua, _S. crepidatus_. Farn L.H., Sept. 17th, several
chasing Gulls. Yarmouth, 20th, many. Heligoland, Oct. 27th, _S.
pomatorhinus_, one.

Procellariidæ, Petrels.--The Stormy Petrel, _P. pelagica_, occurred at
Yarmouth, Oct. 2nd, and Spurn on 23rd, shot in each case from beach.
Hasbro' L.V., 27th, seven caught on deck, on 31st ten, and between
Oct. 27th and Nov. 4th several were taken at various stations at sea
off the east coast. One Fork-tailed Petrel, _P. leucorrhoa_, from
Happisburgh (Hasbro') L.V. in October. A Shearwater was seen at Farn
L.H. July 20th, 6 a.m., going north; and at Spurn L.H. on Aug. 5th, 2
a.m., a Manx Shearwater, _P. anglorum_, was killed against the lantern.
Breydon, Sept. 5th, one shot. In the latter part of the same month two
Sooty Shearwaters, P. griseus, were obtained in Bridlington Bay, and
taken to the shop of Mr. Jones, birdstuffer, where they were seen and
identified by Mr. W. E. Clarke.[26]

[Footnote 26: 'Zoologist,' 1884, p. 180.]

Colymbidæ, Divers.--Tees L.V., March 28th, one Great Northern and two
Red-throated Divers off the light-ship, in company with two Grebes,
twelve Sheldrake, and six Brent Geese. Redcar, Sept. 2nd, four or five
Red-throated Divers; and on 20th several lots of both. Breydon Water,
Oct. 16th, adult Red-throated Diver. At the Farn Islands, last half of
October and in November, many Great Northern Divers about islands; Jan.
15th, 1884, several Red-throated Divers about island.

Podicipidæ, Grebes.--Bridlington, latter part of August, Red-necked
Grebe, _P. griseigena_, shot, in full summer plumage. Spurn, Nov. 2nd,
a few pairs of Little Grebes, _Tachybaptes fluviatilis_, on ponds; and
on Jan. 6th, 1884, three Great Crested Grebes, _P. cristatus_, on the
sea off point.

Alcidæ, Auks.--At Flamborough, in February, 1884, great numbers of
Razorbills, _Alca torda_, all returned to their nesting quarters on
the cliffs, an unprecedented circumstance there; and large numbers of
the Common Guillemot were reported by the fishermen as seen at sea
off the headland. At the Farn Islands, March 22nd, 1883, Guillemots
had come to their nesting quarters, thousands arriving on April 1st.
Puffins on the 15th. On January 10th and 28th, 1884, on each day a
Black Guillemot, _Uria grylle_, was shot from the island. The Little
Auk, _Mergulus alle_, shot there on Dec. 29th; and on Feb. 4th and 5th,
1884, a great many were seen flying and swimming about the islands,
more than had ever been seen before.

The Committee are again indebted to Professor Chr. Fr. Lütken, of the
Universitetets Zoologiske Museum, Copenhagen, for a list of the birds
killed or taken against the lantern of the lighthouse of Stevns, on
the projecting part of Zealand, marking the limit between the Baltic
and Oresund, in the spring and autumn of 1883. The list has been drawn
up by Mr. Autander, a physician living in the neighbourhood of the
lighthouse. In forwarding the list to Professor Lütken he states there
has been in this year only a few nights in which any number of birds
have been killed, in consequence of the sky being generally clear
during the time of the migration.

               Stevns Fyr (Lighthouse of Stevns ), 1883.

Night to--

  April 6th. Saxicola œnanthe          2, male and female.
    "   "    Regulus cristatus         2 males.
    "   "    Erithacus rubecula        1 male.
    "  12th. Turdus viscivorus         2.
    "   "    T. merula                 4.
    "   "    T. musicus                10.
    "   "    Alauda arvensis           6.
    "   "    Regulus cristatus         1.
    "   "    Saxicola œnanthe          4.
    "   "    Erithacus rubecula        2.
    "  13th. Scolopax rusticula        1 male.
    "   "    Columba palumbus          1.
    "   "    Sturnus vulgaris          1.
    "   "    Emberiza citrinella       1.
    "   "    Fringilla cœlebs          1.
    "   "    Saxicola œnanthe          1.
    "   "    Troglodytes parvulus      2.
    "   "    Alauda arvensis           2.
    "   "    Turdus musicus            8.
    "   "    Erithacus rubecula        15.
  Aug.  4th. Tringa alpina             1 male.
    "  26th. Jynx torquilla            1 male.
  Sept. 3rd. Sylvia trochilus          3.
    "   "    Luscinia phœnicurus       1 male.
    "   "    Muscicapa grisola         1 male.
    "   "    M. atricapilla            1 female.
    "   "    Columba ænas              1 female.
    "   "    Lanius collurio           1 young male.
    "   5th. Querquedula cracca        1 male.
    "   "    Motacilla alba            1 young male.
    "   "    Luscinia phœnicurus       6.
    "   "    Jynx torquilla            1.
    "   "    Sterna argentata          1.
    "   "    Erithacus suecicus        1.
    "   "    Sylvia schœnobænus        1.
    "   "    S. cinerea                2.
    "   "    S. hortensis              5.
    "   "    S. trochilus              2.
    "   "    Motacilla flava           1.
    "   "    Saxicola œnanthe          2.
    "   "    S. rubetra                1.
    "   "    Muscicapa atricapilla     4.
    "   "   †Locustella fluviatilis    1.
    "   6th. Podiceps minor            1 young male.
  Oct.  1st. Turdus musicus            2.
    "   4th. Sylvia atricapilla        1.
    "  11th. Turdus musicus            8.
    "   "    Sturnus vulgaris          1.
    "   "    Alauda arvensis           2.
    "   "    Sylvia rufa               2.
    "   "    Fringilla montifringilla  6.
    "   "    Emberiza schœniclus       11.
    "   "    Erithacus rubecula        25.
    "  20th. Fringilla montifringilla  1.
    "  26th. Coccothraustes vulgaris   1 male.
  Nov.  1st. Emberiza citrinella       1 male.

  † Determined at the Museum; not before found in Denmark.

Since the completion of the Report a schedule has been received from
the Leman and Ower L.V. moored forty-eight miles E.N.E. of Cromer, on
the coast of Norfolk. From Feb. 11th to May 8th, Skylarks, Black Crows,
Rooks, Wild Ducks, Starlings, and Goldcrests, are recorded as going
in _westerly_ directions; a like anomalous direction was maintained
during the same period at the Outer Dowsing, Newarp, Cockle, and Llyn
Wells light-vessels by birds passing these stations. On May 8th a great
many Goldcrests came from the south at 11 a.m., and then went _west_.
Sept. 11th, great numbers of Goldcrests going from S.E. to W.; and
on Oct. 28th with Redbreasts and Wrens from S. to N.W. Between Oct.
27th and Nov. 1st two hundred and eight birds were killed or taken
on the vessel, including seven Grey Crows, Larks, Redbreasts, Wrens,
Goldcrests, Starlings, Sparrows, Chaffinches, and two Woodcocks; these
birds were travelling from S., S.E., and E. to N.W., N.N.W., and W.

Wings from Galloper L.V. by Mr. Gurney. Oct. 10th, Tree Sparrow and
Chaffinch; 11th, Shore Lark; 13th, Great Tit; 27th, Chaffinch; 28th,
Blackstart (young male or old female?), Thrush; 30th, Meadow Pipit;
Nov. 3rd, Jack Snipe and Water Rail.

On April 9th, 1884, I received from Mr. Gurney the wing of a Dabchick
(Little Grebe), which struck the lantern of the Hasbro' lighthouse at
11 p.m. on the night of March 30th. The force was so great that the
bird was split from the neck along the entire length of body; and on
April 8th a Hoopoe was killed against the North Hasbro' L.V., and the
head, wings, and legs sent to Mr. Gurney by Mr. B. V. Darnell, mate of
that vessel. A Hoopoe was also taken alive on April 10th, on board a
Grimsby smack when one hundred miles E.N.E. of the Spurn, wind blowing
strong from E., and had been for some days.

At Heligoland, on the night from Aug. 6th to 7th, S.E., a considerable
flight of the Silver Gamma Moth, _Plusia gamma_, but nothing to be
compared with the perfect snow-storms of this moth which passed in
the autumn of 1882, all going west. On Oct. 11th, S.S.W., there was a
considerable flight of _Hybernia defoliaria_, the Mottled Umber Moth,
mixed with _Hybernia aurantiaria_, the scarce Umber; and also during
the nights of the last week in October repeated flights of these
moths. With reference to the great flight of _Plusia gamma_ in 1882, a
notice of which appeared in our last Report, 1882, p. 47, Mr. Charles
Williams, of the Hanois L.H., Guernsey, sends this note:--"Seeing Mr.
Gätke's remarks in your Report about the Gamma Moth, I beg to say that
they were here in June or July."

At the Tees L.V., Nov. 18th, "a large Seal came quite close to vessel,
largest I've ever seen." As the Common Seal is well known at the mouth
of the Tees, this probably may have been the Grey Seal, _Halichœrus
gryphus_.

From Flamborough comes the announcement that, on Feb. 18th, that rare
fish, the Ribbon or Oar-fish, _Regalecus banksii_, was found alive
amongst the rocks on the south side near the Head; it measured thirteen
feet three inches in length, sixteen inches in depth, and five and a
half inches in thickness; it was supposed to have been brought in by
the tremendous easterly swell of the last few days. It was purchased by
Mr. Whittaker, of Scarborough, for thirty pounds.


General Remarks.

The observations taken on the East Coast of England in 1883 have been
such as to generally confirm the conclusions arrived at in previous
Report, having special reference to directions of flight and lines of
migration.

The winter of 1883-84 has been exceptionally mild, and there has been
an almost entire absence of severe frosts and lasting snow-storms;
the prevailing winds in the autumn W. and S.W.--such as we know are
specially favourable for the passage of the North Sea by great flights
of birds, and their direct movement inland without alighting to rest
or recruit themselves in the east coast districts. Our land stations
report a great scarcity both of land and sea-birds; this has not,
however, been the case at sea stations--that is, light-vessels situated
off the coast at distances varying from five to fifty miles; here the
stream of migration, so far from showing any abatement, has flown
steadily on in a full tide, and, judging from the well-filled schedules
that have been returned, there appears to have been a decided increase
in the migrants passing these distant stations--due, perhaps, in some
measure to increased interest and improved observations. Mr. Wm. Stock,
of the Outer Dowsing L.V., remarks that he had never before seen so
many birds past that station. The rush also over Heligoland during the
autumn was enormous. Migration is more marked there than on the English
coast; there was a great movement of various species passing forward on
the 6th and 7th of August, and again on the 14th, and more pronounced
still on the 21st and 22nd.

The first great rush of birds on the English coast was on Sept. 21st,
and two following days; and a similar great movement or rush is
indicated in Mr. Gätke's notes from his island outpost, as well as on
our more distant light-ships. The prevailing winds on the North Sea on
Sept. 21st were moderate north-easterly and easterly off the coasts
of Denmark and Holland, blowing strong easterly on to our northern
coasts north of the Humber, with southerly and south-westerly off the
southeast coasts, causing cross-currents over the North sea. Whatever
then was the impulse, atmospheric or otherwise, which induced such an
immense rush of various birds at this time, it was one which acted
alike, and with precisely the same impulse, on the Sea Eagle and tiny
Goldcrest.

The second great rush was on the 12th and 13th of October, a similar
movement being recorded at Heligoland. Then again from the 27th to the
31st, and somewhat less through the first week in November, the passage
across Heligoland, as well as the rush on our east coast, was enormous.
Speaking of the nights from the 27th to 31st inclusive, Mr. Gätke says,
"This was the first move by the million; for four nights there has been
a gigantic feathery tide running." During this time there were variable
winds over the North Sea, but generally easterly and south-easterly on
the Continent; but strong west winds and squalls prevailing generally
on the 5th and 6th of November. With the outburst of some severe
weather during the first week in December a considerable local movement
is indicated along our coast from north to south, culminating in the
enormous rush of Snow Buntings into Lincolnshire about the end of the
first week in that month. A careful perusal of the Report will show how
generally the rushes across Heligoland correlate with those observed
on our east coast, although not always confined to the same species in
both localities.

A somewhat remarkable and very anomalous movement of migrants is
recorded in the schedules from some of the light-vessels off the
Lincolnshire and Norfolk coasts in the spring of 1883. In February,
March, April, and May, birds passing the Leman and Ower, Llyn Wells,
Outer Dowsing, Newarp, and Cockle light-vessels were as a rule coming
from easterly and passing in westerly directions. Had this movement
been noticed at one station only we might perhaps have been inclined to
doubt the accuracy of the return, but the fact of five light-vessels
having no communication with each other reporting the same circumstance
proves the correctness of the observations. A summary of the spring
quarter at these stations shows:--

Outer Dowsing L.V., March 31st to May 18th, Sparrows, Chaffinches,
Wrens, Rooks, Larks, Tree Sparrows, Linnets, Titlarks, Bullfinches,
from E., S.E., E. by S., and N.E. to W, N.W., W.N.W., and W.S.W.

Llyn Wells L.V., April 30th, various flocks of Crows to S.W.

Newarp L.V., March 17th to April 15th, Crows on six days to W.

Leman and Ower L.V., Feb. 18th to May 8th, Skylarks, Starlings,
Titlarks, Goldcrests, E. and E.S.E. to N.W.

Cockle L.V., Feb. 22nd to March 31st, Black Crows, Ducks, Jackdaws,
Starlings, Larks, Lapwings, "Snow-birds" to W. On March 20th, 24th, and
26th, Black Crows or Rooks continuous from 5.50 a.m. to 11 a.m., E.
to W.; and on 31st also continuous from morning to night in the same
direction.

All these entries show a great immigration to our coast from the east
in the spring months, and on precisely the same lines and directions as
are travelled by these birds in the autumn.

An interesting feature of the autumn migration is the occurrence of
a flight of the Blue-throated Warbler, _Cyanecula suecica_; twelve
altogether were obtained, all being birds of the year, and nine of
these on the coast of Norfolk, besides about twenty others seen by
competent observers.

Very few Goldcrests, compared with the enormous flights of the
previous autumn, have crossed, and the same scarcity is observable in
the Heligoland return. Curiously enough, the Hedgesparrow, _Accentor
modularis_, which migrated in such immense numbers in the same autumn,
has been almost entirely absent. About half a dozen are recorded at
Heligoland, none on the East Coast of England.

The intermittent migration of some birds, as the Jay, Shore Lark,
Goldcrest, Hedgesparrow, Siskin, and Mealy Redpole, indicated by
their extraordinary abundance in some years, and partial or entire
absence in others, is perhaps suggestive of local causes influencing
and regulating their movements, such as a succession of favourable
breeding seasons, scarcity or failure of food, sudden meteorological
changes; these acting separately or in combination, would be sufficient
to compel the migration of large bodies of birds from centres or
localities, where, under normal conditions, they would either have
remained or some part only migrated. In this manner whole districts
may become denuded for a time of their feathered inhabitants, and the
balance become again rectified by a return movement in the spring, or
from the surplus supply bred in other districts.

Of the enormous immigration which crosses our east coast in the autumn,
either to winter in these islands or passing across them, a small
proportion only appear to return by the same route. Spring returns
from lighthouses and light-vessels show birds then move on the same
lines as were followed in the autumn, but in the reverse direction. Yet
these return travellers do not represent anything like a tithe of the
immigrants which, week by week and month after month in the autumn,
pour in one great tide on to the coast.

What is called the "first flight" of the Woodcock arrived on the
Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Norfolk coasts on the night of Oct. 21st.
The "great flight" or rush, which covered the whole of the east coast
from the Farn Islands to Yarmouth, was on the nights of the 28th and
29th. These two periods correlate with the great flights of Woodcocks
over Heligoland.

We are again indebted to Professor Ch. F. Lütken, of Copenhagen, for
a list of the birds killed or taken alive against the lantern of the
Stevns lighthouse, at the entrance of the Oresund, in Zealand. The list
is specially interesting, as it names so many of the Heligoland birds.
The occurrence of Locustella fluviatilis on Sept. 5th is the first
recorded example for Denmark.

The Roller, _Coracias garrula_, occurred in October in two localities,
one in Lincolnshire, the other in Suffolk. Two examples of the Sooty
Shearwater, _Puffinus griseus_, were obtained in Bridlington Bay in
the end of September. Altogether there has been a very marked absence
along our east coast of rare and casual visitants; Heligoland, however,
retains its pre-eminence for rare wanderers, and Mr. Gätke's list for
1883 includes _Turdus varius_, _Pratincola rubicola_ var. _indicus_,
_Phylloscopus superciliosus_, _Hypolais pallida_, _Motacilla citriola_,
_Anthus cervinus_, _A. richardi_, _Oriolus galbula_, _Lanius major_,
_Muscicapa parva_, _Linota exilipes_, _Emberiza melanocephala_, _E.
cirlus_, _E. rustica_, _E. pusilla_, _Pastor roseus_, and _Xema
Sabinii_.

_Note._--At page 47, under the head "_Coracias garrula_, Roller,"
the locality of Bradwell is erroneously given in Norfolk, instead of
Suffolk (2½ miles S.W. of Great Yarmouth). Mr. Gurney writes that, on
June 6th, 1884, a Roller was shot at Gresham, near Cromer, and that
before this Norfolk has not produced one for about thirty years.




WEST COAST OF SCOTLAND.

    "And now, their route designed, their leaders chose,
    Their tribes adjusted, clean'd their vigorous wings.
    And many a circle, many a short essay,
    Wheel'd round and round, in congregation full
    The figur'd flight ascends, and riding high
    The aërial billows, mixes with the clouds."

                                                  Thomson.


Schedules were sent to thirty-four stations, as in previous years. We
have received filled schedules from seventeen stations.

Generally the returns are very light, still lighter than last year.

We have notes on about thirty-nine species of land birds from this
coast; about twenty species of water birds; and about eight species of
littoral species, or wading birds.

The spring migration, for sake of uniformity with the East Coast, I
have kept separate. Weather notes are included in the General Remarks.

                           List of Stations.

  '79 '80 '81 '82 '83
   *   *   *           81. Cape Wrath, Sutherland 400 ft.
   *   *   *       *   82. Rhu Stoir,      "      195  "  Wm. Wither

                            Outer Hebrides.

   *   *   *   *   *   83. Butt of Lewis             170  "  A. Thompson
       *   *       *   84. Stornoway                  56  "  John Grierson
   *   *   *           85. Island Glass              130  "
   *   *   *   *   *   86. Monach Isles             {150  "} J. Youngclause
                                                    { 62  "}
       *   *           87. Ushenish                  176  "
                   *   88. Barra Head                683  "  Wm. Irvine

                  Mainland, Skye, and Inner Hebrides.

                       89. Rona, Skye                222  "
       *   *   *   *   90. Kyleakin, Rosshire         53  "  D. M'Culloch
       *   *           91. Isle Ornsay, Skye          58  "
   *   *               92. Ardnamurchan Pt. Argyl.   180  "
                      {93. Hynish Signal Tower,    }
   *   *   *   *   *  {      Tyree                 } 150  "  Wm. Crow
                      {94. Skerryvore, off Tyree   }
   *   *   *   *   *   95. Dhuheartach, S. of
                             Ross of Mull            145  "  Jas. Ewing
   *   *   *   *   *   96. Sound of Mull              55  "  W. M'Lellan
                       97. Corran Ferry, Loch Eil     38  "
       *   *   *   *   98. Lismore Island, Oban      103  "  Alex. Murray
   *   *               99. Fladda, Easdale            42  "
   *   *   *          100. Rhuvaal, Islay            147  "
       *   *   *   *  101. M'Arthur's Head, Islay    128  "  W. Maill
   *   *   *   *   *  102. Skervuile, Jura            73  "  John Ewing
   *   *   *   *   *  103. Rhinns of Islay           159  "  Andrew Lyall
   *   *              104. Lochindaul                 50  "
                      105. Mull of Kintyre           297  "
                      107. Devaar, Kintyre           120  "
                      108. Pladda, Arran             130  "
           *       *  109. Lamlash, Arran             46  "  David Waters
       *   *          110. Turnberry, Ayrshire        96  "
   *   *   *       *  111. Corsewall, Wigtonshire    112  "  Robt. Laidlaw
   *   *   *   *   *  112. Loch Ryan,       "         46  "  Ralph Ewing
   *   *   *   *   *  113. Portpatrick,     "         37  "  James Begg
   *   *   *   *      114. Mull of Galloway "        325  "
           *          115. Little Ross, Kircudbright 175  "
                      116.
                      117.
                      118.
                      119. [1880]
                      120.



General Remarks by Reporters.

Mr. James Youngclause, Monach lighthouse, says:--"I am sorry to have
such a meagre report to send you, but birds have been awfully scarce
here for some years back, and I have sent you records of all that I
have seen."

I am obliged to Mr. William Irvine for the first report I have received
from Barra Head, which, however, is a station which can hardly be
expected to give large returns, owing to its position and great height
above the sea. A daily record here for a few seasons of the movements
of Gannets and rock-birds might prove of considerable interest, such as
daily hours of going to and from their feeding-grounds. Such might be
found also interesting to fisherfolk.

Mr. James Ewing, of Dhuheartach, says of the spring migration and the
long-continued east winds:--"A few Larks in March, and some Stonechats
in the first days of April, are all that we have seen of the spring
migration. I am convinced that a change of wind happening during the
migratory season tends more to lead the birds astray than strong
breezes. It will be interesting to note if there is any increase during
this autumn, as our light, which was red towards Mull, has been changed
to a white occulting light."

By the autumn schedules migration appears to have quite ceased here by
date of Dec. 7th.

Mr. W. M'Lellan speaks of the great scarcity of shore-birds, as
compared with other seasons. Where Curlews were seen daily in past
years only one was seen this year. Season very open and mild.

Mr. Alex. Murray, Lismore, writes:--"During the last five nights of
October we had the largest number of birds that I have seen for a long
time, and especially Gold-crested Wrens; but since that time up to date
(8th Jan. 1884) there has been little of note."

Mr. Andrew Lyall says, "Very few birds at Rhinns of Islay this season,
and not many striking." But the rush at end of October and beginning of
November was very marked.

Mr. David Waters has few night records to chronicle, most of his
observations being made during the day.

Mr. James Begg, Port Patrick, writes:--"Flocks of migrants very scarce
this winter. Great many sea-gulls flying inland and coming back to sea
daily. The Gannets commence to go south and return north in flight past
this station from March to September in great numbers."

Mr. William Wither sends a light schedule from Storr Head, and speaks
of the general scarcity of birds there, but at a locality a little
more inland birds are plentiful in summer and autumn, and Mr. M'Ivor,
teacher there, has kindly offered to keep land-notes another year.

Although so light at Dhuheartach, a considerable migration observed at
Skerryvore both in spring and autumn. On Oct. 30th (the date of the
universal rush of Thrushes, &c.) Mr. William Crow saw three Bullfinches
on the rock, wind S., fresh, and fog, and captured one of them with
little difficulty. "It appeared quite tame, I approaching it within
four feet. We placed a spare cage we had, with some linseed, within
six feet of it. The bird went in at once, and is still alive. It drank
fresh water to excess after being caught, and was ill all next day. It
revived afterwards, and is doing well."

From Turnberry lighthouse there is no return, but Mr. Andrew writes,
birds were scarcer than usual. But as this is a station where there is
usually some migration discernible he hopes to send returns in future.
Like others of our reporters, he naturally complains of his difficulty
about the names of the birds; but if he will only enter such as he is
sure of, and send me the head and wings of others, or even the wings
alone, and by attaching a bit of cardboard and a number to them, and a
corresponding number in the schedule instead of a name, I could in most
cases be able to identify them.[27]

[Footnote 27: A general request to this effect will be found in our
latest issue of Letters of Instruction.]

From Cape Wrath lighthouse comes the following P.C.:--"There are no
land-birds at this station, with the exception of Grouse. The same
schedule will apply every year for the sea-birds, as they come and go
within a week of the same time. Eight years' experience." I may just
once more try to explain that it is exactly this week of difference
in time, one year with another, which the Committee desire to collect
statistics about as regards sea-fowl and rock-birds.

Turdidæ.--The spring migration on the West Coast seems almost to have
escaped notice. At Stornoway Thrushes were heard on Feb. 19th and 20th,
and heard and seen on the 27th, but these may have been residents.

The autumn migration, however, is almost as marked as on the East
Coast, the time and extent agreeing, though numerically, as might
be expected, not so great. Extent as follows:--Stornoway in the
north (light), Island Glass (indication), Monach (do.), Barra Head
(considerable), and on the mainland and Inner Hebrides from Kyleakin
(light), Skerryvore (distinct and considerable), Dhuheartach (light),
Sound of Mull (indication), M'Arthur's Head (a few), Rhinns of Islay.(a
few), Skervuile (a few), Lamlash (light), Corsewall (heavy), Loch Ryan
(considerable). The above remarks apply principally to Blackbirds and
Song Thrushes, but Fieldfares and "Mountain" Thrushes are once or twice
mentioned, and one Water Ouzel was caught at Skervuile on Sept. 13th.

The time occupied was as follows:--Earliest record in autumn, Sept.
23rd, one Thrush on lantern at Lamlash; may have been local. Next, 1st
and 7th and 8th, a few scattered records at Barra Head, and between
Dhuheartach and Lismore. About Oct. 23rd greater numbers, but nothing
very remarkable till Oct. 28th, 29th, 30th, 31st, and Nov. 1st to 3rd
or 4th, when the rush took place. Movements continued up to end of
November, but not large numerically, and nothing more that could be
called a rush. A considerable number were killed at Skerryvore at the
height of the rush on 28th, 29th and 30th; eight Thrushes on first
date, thirty-six on 29th, and thirteen on 30th. Blackbirds and Thrushes
about in equal proportion of records, but Thrushes bulking largest
numerically. Species included are Song Thrush (max.). Blackbirds (large
numbers), Fieldfares, and one Dipper or Water Ouzel at Skervuile.
Thrushes of sorts quite absent during a rush of other species at
Kyleakin, and throughout the season. Five species.

Saxicolinæ.--Wheatears.--In spring, appearance of a rush at Skerryvore
on April 20th and 21st, fifty seen during the day on former date and
twelve on latter; and on April 8th a single bird at Dhuheartach. A
great many at Skervuile on May 5th, and on 15th four seen at Butt of
Lewis.

In autumn, extent, from Stornoway (Oct.), Skerryvore (Aug), Dhuheartach
(Sept. and Oct.), Lismore (Aug.). Redstarts.--Skervuile (Sept.),
Corsewall (Aug.). Earliest, Aug. 24th, at Skerryvore. Latest, Oct.
29th, at Dhuheartach. Rush of Redstarts all night at Lismore. The above
remarks apply in all cases to Wheatears (or so-called "Stonechats"),
except where otherwise specified. Numbers at Stornoway with Linnets in
Oct. Considered rare here by reporter.

Prevailing winds in spring, E. through S.E. and S.S.E. to S., and
variable on April 8th at Dhuheartach. Two species.

Silviinæ.--Robin.--No spring records. Autumn, Robin, Kyleakin;
Stornoway, isolated examples during December; Lismore, on Nov. 11th,
with Wrens and Linnets, and a few single records in September and
October; Dhuheartach, few; Lamlash and Corsewall, single records, and
Robins accompanying rush of other species on Aug. 28th and 29th.
At Kyleakin, Robins arrived on Nov. 15th and remained all winter.
Prevailing winds, W. and northerly, very rarely easterly or S.E. One
species.

Phylloscopinæ.--Goldcrest.--No spring records. Autumn, slight
indications and single records as far north as Dhuheartach; one at
midnight on Nov. 7th, light W., haze. Then again at Lismore, Oct. 31st,
light S. airs, along with Larks; Skervuile, few, Nov. 1st, light S.
wind; Lamlash, one; Corsewall, great numbers, or rush, on Aug. 30th,
heralded by one single bird the day before. Loch Ryan, four on Oct.
30th. One species.

Accentor.--Hedgesparrow.--A number seen in the garden at Lamlash on
Nov. 21st, during stormy weather. One species.

Paridæ.--Two Titmice struck at Sound of Mull, in light W. breeze, not
killed, on Oct. 30th. One species.

Troglodytinæ.--Spring, at Corsewall six struck, none killed, on 28th,
and five rested at same place on 29th; wind light E. and haze both
nights.

In autumn a few records at Dhuheartach, Sound of Mull, M'Arthur's Head,
Lamlash, Corsewall, and Loch Ryan. Earliest, Oct. 3rd; latest, Nov.
30th; all single birds, or very light returns. Winds, N.W. or N.N.W.,
except on Nov. 6th, at Lamlash, when wind was N.E. and weather fine.
One species.

Motacillidæ.--In spring, at Kyleakin (earliest March 20th, when
two seen flying S.! light E., clear), Skerryvore, Dhuheartach, and
Skervuile. Latest at Kyleakin on May 17th, when two seen on garden
wall. Largest number, four, at Dhuheartach, rested on April 20th, and
flew towards Isle of Colonsay. Records relate always to "Wagtails."

In autumn, at stations:--Barra Head (several had been there for a month
on Aug. 27th), Skerryvore, Dhuheartach, M'Arthur's Head (only record a
flock on Nov. 5th, with N.W. gale and sleet), Rhinns of Islay (first
and only record on Nov. 4th, a single bird, with W. gale), Lamlash
(three on Sept. 22nd, and two on Nov. 12th, the latest record, winds
westerly). One ? species.

Anthidæ.--Single spring record, one Titlark, at Lamlash, rested on
lantern on May 2nd.

In autumn, one at Skerryvore rested on rocks on Aug. 24th, light W.,
haze, and _a number_ at Lamlash on Oct. 6th, and a few on 30th, being all
the records. One species.

Hirundinidæ.--Spring records in April; earliest at Loch Ryan on
15th, when thirty arrived,--see autumn under September,--May, June;
latest June 15th, two flying S. at Kyleakin, or, if we take July,
three at Barra Head on 8th; remained all day, wind var. to S.E. by
evening. Greatest number of records in May. Stations:--Barra Head (Sand
Martins), Kyleakin, Skerryvore, Lismore, Rhinns of Islay, Lamlash,
and Corsewall. The following are first arrivals:--Barra Head (Sand
Martins), May 1st, two, fresh S.E., clear; Lamlash, May 1st; Corsewall,
May 2nd; Loch Ryan, April 15th. All records above apply to Chimney
Swallows, save in the two instances of Sand Martins.

In autumn records light also on the whole coast. Dhuheartach, Lismore,
and Loch Ryan. Earliest, and rush, Aug. 19th, at Dhuheartach, large
flock of old and young flying S., and at Lismore, one seen flying S. On
Sept. 23rd twenty Swallows left Loch Ryan, and on 28th the remaining
ten (see spring, _supra_); winds westerly and N.W. Three species.

Fringillidæ.--Spring:--At Butt of Lewis, four Tree Sparrows on April
14th, light S.W. wind; and Sparrows, a large flock flying south, light
E., haze. Also Sparrows at M'Arthur's Head, a number on May 12th. Of
Linnets, many after gale of April 17th, at M'Arthur's Head, a flock at
Lismore on June 21st, and one bird at Skerryvore on June 25th. A single
Goldfinch at Lismore, on 21st, with the Linnets.

In autumn:--Earliest July 28th, a very large flock of Sparrows flying
S.E., at Butt of Lewis, and none again till Sept. 4th, when a number
of Linnets remained about till the 9th. Latest record Oct. 30th,
participated in rush of other species, but on Dec. 15th a rush of
"small birds" is recorded at several stations. Greatest numbers in
October, at Stornoway, Skerryvore (a Bullfinch, see light-keeper's
remarks, _antea_), Lismore (good many), M'Arthur's Head, Lamlash. It
is difficult to fix dates of rushes, but one great rush took place on
Sept. 15th, of Linnets and Sparrows at M'Arthur's Head, and indicated
at Lamlash by ten Linnets flying south. These notes are given of
Linnets and Grey Linnets, also on Oct. 30th, at Lismore, of Green and
Grey Linnets, a number at Priory Farm. Numerous instances of direction
of flight are given, usually "flying S." We have received considerably
more statistics this year of these important _directions of flight_.
We wish our reporters could distinguish between Common Linnets, Green
Linnets, and Twites or Mountain Linnets, always when possible. Linnets
have travelled in company with Wheatears at Stornoway, and with
Thrushes and Curlews (the latter several times). About seven species.

Emberizidæ.--Snow Bunting. Very scanty records on W. coast. At
Stornoway one, first seen on Oct. 17th, and twenty on 18th. At Lismore
twenty on Oct. 22nd. At Rhinns of Islay one on Nov. 5th, and in
December no records, and in January a few at Butt of Lewis on 26th, and
strong W. and sleet. Prevailing winds W., strong to gales, but mod. N.
at Rhinns of Islay on Nov. 5th. One species.

Alaudidæ.--Spring at Skerryvore, earliest Feb. 10th, four struck, two
killed, strong S.W.; and in March, at same place, on 10th, nine struck
and three were killed, fresh N. and showers.

In autumn, at Dhuheartach, earliest on Sept. 10th, a few, and on 29th
three; wind N.N.E., clear. Also, furthest north, records at Butt of
Lewis, Stornoway, and so south by Skerryvore, Dhuheartach, Skervuile,
and Rhinns of Islay. Latest at Stornoway, small numbers on 24th.
Greatest movements in October at Butt of Lewis, on 11th, large numbers
flying south; and at Stornoway 19th, 20th, and 23rd; on latter date
with Thrushes and one Redbreast. Prevailing winds, northerly and
westerly. One species.

Sturninæ.--Starlings feed all through the month of April at Butt of
Lewis.

Autumn records scarce. Regular daily at Rhinns of Islay all August.
No records anywhere given in September. [We trust our reporters bear
in mind that we desire movements of even our commonest species, and
especially directions of flight.] In October a few records from Butt
of Lewis, two killed, but Mr. Thompson considers these part of the
residents; also at M'Arthur's Head and Lamlash. If any rush it was on
Oct. 30th, and also 29th, when it was noticed at Island Ghlais[28]
and at Rhinns of Islay; but the movement appears to have been
insignificant. I have a single record in November from Monach Island,
and one of a flock in December at Loch Ryan. One species.

[Footnote 28: Ghlais or Glass: both spellings used.]

Corvidæ.--Jackdaws, Crows, Black Grows, Grey Crows, Ravens, and one of
Magpie, the latter at Kyleakin, marked "very rare," on Jan. 7th, flying
S.E. Stations are Skerryvore, Dhuheartach in spring; and Rhu Stoir,
where Crows (are these Rooks or Carrion Crows?) feed every day till
31st (I suspect these are local Rooks from Cama Loch, but would like
to know for certain). Only some ten records in all--February, March,
April, May, June; and August, September, October (Ravens at Kyleakin),
November (Jackdaws at Sound of Mull, about 200 flying N. very high,
mod. breeze, sleet, showers). December 27th, two Ravens, flying W.;
light E., clear. Six species.

Cypselidæ.--Three May records, all at Dhuheartach. Single birds on 22nd
and 23rd, flying E., with light S.E., clear; and on 24th, one flying
E., with W.N.W., and one found dead on rocks. One species.

Cuculidæ.--Cuckoo records in spring, from--

  Stornoway, first heard on May 2nd; N.E. breeze.

  Skerryvore, first heard at Land Station, Tyree, on June 1st.

  M'Arthur's Head, first on May 17th; light wind, clear.

  Rhinns of Islay, May 24th; fresh W., haze.

  Corsewall, May 6th, and Loch Ryan on May 2nd; light N.E., clear,
     and rain.

_Note._--During the first week in May there appears to have been an
indication of a migration of other species.

The only autumn record is of one found dead at Rhinns of Islay on Sept.
1st. One species.

Strigidæ.--Only one record on April 27th at Dhuheartach, where one
rested on rock at ten a.m.; light N.W. wind, and haze. One species.

Falconidæ.--A Falcon flying N., at Kyleakin, in February; a Hawk at
Dhuheartach, flying round on 19th April, where in autumn they make
daily visits, and even in some seasons all the year round. In September
one Hawk remained a week here, resting on the balcony at night, and
feeding on small birds in the day. A Falcon seen at Butt of Lewis on
Sept. 1st, and a Sparrow Hawk at Skerryvore on Sept. 1st, flying E. Two
records in October and one in December--a Falcon flying W.; light N.W.
airs. About three species.

Pelecanidæ.--In uniformity with East coast, records of Gannets,
chronologically under each station, beginning in the north, so far
as records permit. The stations recording in 1883 are Butt of Lewis
(82), Rhu Stoir (83), Stornoway (84), Barra Head (88), Kyleakin (90),
Dhuheartach (95), Lismore (98), M'Arthur's Head (101), Skervuile
(102), and Lamlash (109). (N.B. The Committee would be obliged for
chronological returns, giving always directions of flight, from any
other stations, of Gannets and Rock birds):--

  82. July 25th, began flying north in some numbers to Aug, 10th;
     fresh N.

  83. March 15th, seen daily in great numbers, noted at 83, up to
     March 31st, but no directions of flight given, which we would
     like to have always.

  84. In August, reported as unusually scarce this season, but no
     definite records given nor directions of flight, or if fishing
     or not.

  88. Under date of September 1st, the remark "a few fishing every
     day."

  90. On June 20th flocks all day, flying east. Was this the only day
     on which Gannets were seen here?

  95. Dec. 7th, two seen; only record given; no direction of flight;
     wind light N.W., clear.

  98. May 14th, "Solan Geese"; fresh, S. breeze, showery. June 22nd,
     "Solan Geese" flying south; var. light, clear. Aug. 16th, two,
     flying south; fresh N.W., clear.

  101. April, a few daily seeking food.

  102. March 21st, "Gannets seen;" E.S.E., light breeze. May 9th,
     "Solan Geese" seen; fresh E. July 16th, "Solans;" fresh N.W.,
     clear. July 24th, "Solans;" N.N.W., clear. July 25th, "Solans;"
     N.N.W., clear.

  109. Feb. 5th, the first seen for some months. One species.

Ardeidæ.--Only one record of Herons at Monach Island, where five were
seen on the outlying rocks on Nov. 25th, strong E. wind; and the remark
"seen daily all the year round at Kyleakin." One species.

Anatidæ; Anserinæ (Geese).--I think we should endeavour to tabulate
also the movements of different species of Wild Geese; but as the
records are a little confusing, I find we must do so under one, or
at mast two headings, the occurrences of which are most frequently
recorded under these designations.

Some four species (namely Bean, Pink-footed, Greylag--rarest
migrant--and White-fronted) may be included in the following, reported
as "Wild Grey Geese," "Geese," "Grey Geese," "Wild Geese," by the
various reporters.

The stations returning these are:--Rhu Stoir (82), Butt of Lewis (83),
Monach (86), Kyleakin (90), Lismore (98), Lamlash (109), and Corsewall
(111).

  82. "Wild Geese," April 14th, three; light S., haze and rain.

  83. "Wild Geese," Sept. 19th, large flock, flying W., past the
     lighthouse, and then turning S.W.; westerly gale and showers.

  86. "Wild Grey Geese," Nov. 10th, twenty, flying round; light S.E.

  90. "Geese," Sept. 19th, four, flying S.W.; light E.

  98. "Grey Geese," Nov. 1st, five, flying S.; light S., haze.

  109. "Grey Geese," April 27th, forty, flying N., light S., haze.
     April 28th, fifty, flying N. Oct. 7th, three, flying S., N.W.,
     fine. Nov. 1st, twenty, flying E., light E., haze.

  111. "Wild Geese," Nov. 13th, twenty, flying E., light E., haze.
     Nov. 14th, thirty, flying E.

Barnacle Goose seen at following stations:--Barra Head (88), Kyleakin
(90).

  88. April 25th, 100, "flying over;" light N.E., clear. May 1st,
     150, fresh N.E., clear. Sept. 22nd, about thirty arrived, light
     S.W., haze and rain. Nov. 10th, about fifty seen flying S., var.
     W., showers.

  90. Nov. 30th, seven flying S.W. ("first I have seen here"), light
     N.W., clear. Five species of Geese.

Eider Ducks, _ut sup._ 82, 95, 103.

  82. May 26th, six, passing N., light S.W., clear. June 30th,
     sixteen, passing N., light E., var.

  95. Oct. 12th, one, first seen this season. Oct. 15th, six, fishing
     round rock. November, forty (twenty males and twenty females),
     fishing round rock, light N.W., clear.

Wild Duck, only at 83, 88, 90.

  83. March 21st, two males and two females, killed at lantern;
     slight S.E., haze.

  88. Sept. 21st, twenty, flying W., light E., haze.

  90. Sept. 19th, four, flying S.W., light E.

Eider Ducks at Rhu Stoir, Dhuheartach, and Rhinns of Islay. Three at
first named locality on April 14th; light S., haze and rain. Six on May
26th; strong S.W., passing north. Sixteen on June 30th, passing north,
with light var., and clear. Then at Dhuheartach, the first seen this
season was on Oct. 12th, in autumn migration, and at Rhinns of Islay,
three seen during a S.W. gale. At Dhuheartach again, twenty males and
twenty females, seen fishing round the rock, during strong W.N.W. wind,
and clear on Dec. 7th. Two species.

Columbidæ.--A large flock of Rock Doves is resident at Butt of Lewis,
and is seen daily flying inland to feed. At Kyleakin a Woodpigeon was
seen flying S.E. at noon on Dec. 15th, with light W. wind, and clear;
at same station, on 23rd, four Rock Doves flying south, wind light
W.S.W.; and at same place two more flying south, with E.S.E. and haze,
on Jan. 2nd. One species.

Rallinæ.--Corn Crake.--At Stornoway, first heard on May 2nd. At Barra
Head, one seen on July 1st, var., S.E., and fog. At Kyleakin, first
heard on May 16th, S., clear. At Rhinns of Islay, one found dead on May
23rd, light W., haze. One species.

Charadriadæ.--Spring. Oystercatchers are resident all the year at Cape
Wrath. At Barra Head, three pairs arrived on April 10th. At M'Arthur's
Head they were present all April.

In autumn oyster catchers appeared in flocks, along with the rush of
land migrants, about Aug. 23rd, at Stornoway, at which place they are
generally seen all September.

Golden Plover records quite absent for 1883.

Lapwing.--Spring record at Rhu Stoir, two seen on April 4th. In autumn,
at Kyleakin, ninety were counted flying S.E., and crying loudly, with
N.W. wind and haze, on Aug. 15th. Eight more on 23rd, flying east, wind
S.E., and haze; and at Lamlash, a single bird rested on the Island on
Aug. 13th. At Barra Head, seventeen were seen at two p.m., light east
wind, and haze (direction of flight not given), on Sept. 21st; one
record there also in October. At Loch Ryan, a flock flying S.E., on
Nov. 15th, S.E. wind; and at Dhuheartach, where migration appeared to
cease on Dec. 29th, the last migrant seen was a Lapwing, resting on the
Lantern on that date. At Kyleakin seven were seen flying S.W. on Jan.
4th, 1884. Two species.

Scolopacidæ.--Woodcock, Snipe, Curlew, Whimbrel. No records of Woodcock
till October. Then a few at Monach Island, Dhuheartach, Lismore, and
Loch Ryan; and in November, at Kyleakin and Lismore. Single entries
on 16th at Kyleakin, and 5th at Lismore. Two killed at Monach on Oct.
29th, one killed at Dhuheartach on 31st, and three on 29th, at Lismore;
and one on 31st, at Loch Ryan, showing a general movement at these
dates.

Snipe were even scarcer; earliest Oct. 22nd, at Monach, and occurring
on the same dates as Woodcock, or nearly.

Curlew.--Numerous records at most of the stations, dating from Feb.
5th, at Rhuvaal, on to November. An appearance of a rush northwards on
May between 14th and 16th, when flocks seen flying north at Rhinns of
Islay; also on 16th, at Lismore, during the day. Records also at Loch
Ryan, Skerryvore, &c.

In autumn, at Stornoway, Monach, Barra Head, and most stations indeed;
earliest, July 25th, at Skerryvore, when five Curlews seen flying N.E.,
on to Nov. 16th, at Sound of Mull. Between Sept. 16th and 30th, at
Stornoway, seen every day on the shore, and large numbers on the 30th.

There is only one record of Whimbrel under the name "The Small Curlew,"
when two were seen at Skerryvore flying about the rocks. I wish we
could more exactly trace the lines of migration of the Whimbrel, or
"May fowl" of the Hebrides, in both spring and autumn (see remarks
of Mr. D. Gray in the Atlantic, _antea_). No records of Redshanks or
Sandpipers. Four species.

Laridæ; Sterninæ.--Arrivals in spring recorded as follows:--At Rhu
Stoir, three Terns on May 10th; light N. breeze. At Stornoway, Terns
"arrived as usual about this time," and left in August. At Skervuile,
arrived on 14th, and more seen on 16th. The first came with a fresh S.
breeze and rain. At Corsewall first observed was on May 11th.

In autumn. Terns, as already stated, left Stornoway in August, but
"about ten days later than usual." The last seen at Skervuile was on
Sept. 6th. At Sound of Mull, on Sept. 30th, a flock rested for two
hours, and then flew away S.E., composed of old and young together.
Moderate wind.

An utter absence of records of any Gulls, Skuas, "Boatswains," or any
other Laridæ. One or two species?

Procellariidæ.--One record of Storm Petrel at Lismore, where it is
accounted very rare, on Oct. 3rd, when one was killed; strong N.W.
wind, and haze. One species.

Alcidæ.--At various stations taken notice of as follows:--At Barra
Head, a few seen on Feb. 4th; fresh S.W., banks of fog. No records in
April. "Marrots" and "Razorbills." At Barra Head, numbers seen of same,
and Puffins, on April 27th; light S.E. wind. A few Puffins seen on May
1st; and fresh N.E. A great many more on May 2nd; fresh N.E. At Butt of
Lewis, first Razorbills seen on April 25th.

In autumn, Marrots leave Barra Head Aug. 12th, along with the bulk of
Razorbills, but Puffins not till Aug. 25th. Marrots and Razorbills
left with fresh E. wind. Puffins left in fresh S. wind.

Cormorants arrived about same time as Razorbills and Aleidæ, but remain
about six weeks later at Butt of Lewis; and at Kyleakin there is record
of a flock of twenty-eight flying W. on 13th, with S.W. breeze. Four
species.

Colymbidæ.--On June 10th one great N. Diver seen swimming near
Lighthouse, at Kyleakin, moving N. (but this movement may be due to set
of the tide only, hour not given, J. A. H. B.). In autumn, at Sound
of Mull, a G. N. D., passing S., var., light breezes. At Lismore, one
flying south; stormy W., rain, on Oct. 17th. At Sound of Mull, two
passing south, at noon; light airs. If the movement is only local
and due to tides, this should be mentioned in schedules, and the
words "drifting with tide," or "swimming with tide," used instead of
"passing." They are not likely to swim against the tide, but if this
phenomenon is observed it should be recorded. One species.


Weather Notes for General Remarks on Spring Migration, 1883.

Fearful snow-storm over the north of Shetland on March 17th, and N.E.
gales and snow prevailed from March 5th to 24th; E. and N.E. and N.
winds prevailed all over Scotland with gales, notably on March 6th and
17th; from 6th to 24th slight changes to S.E., but of short duration;
on 25th (Sunday) wind S.W. strong to gale and rain, the first rain
since February, but only lasted half a day; wind backed again to N.E.
In Orkney the sea rose suddenly very high on the E. coast on March
21st; very cold and fine on 22nd, wind light S.W. "Large quantities
of Cormorants, Razorbills, and Shags, &c., are coming ashore along
the E. coast of Orkney." Deaths supposed to be from scarcity of food,
_viz._, coal-fish; and great damage done to rabbits by Hawks, in some
cases nearly exterminating them (daily papers of March 23rd, 1883). At
Dunipace 12° of frost on night of March 27th. Fearful gale at 9 a.m. on
March 30th, bar. at 28′ 9″; gale all night from S.W., bar. rising all
day; again till 9 p.m. to 29′ 6″, wind S.W. at 10 p.m.; again at 30′
2″. S. gale at Isle of May on March 29th and 30th.

As already mentioned in our General Remarks on 1882 Report (Fourth
Report, 1882, p. 67) the effects of these gales and N.E. winds in
spring of 1883 was almost to stop migration at Isle of May, which
migration had "set in pretty briskly" on March 2nd, and almost ceased
on the 5th. From the latter date only a few "stragglers of the
strongest wings" up to the 19th; while a great concourse of Wagtails
was observed inland in Edinburgh (see report as above quoted); few were
seen at Isle of May till the 30th, when five came with S. gale (_op.
cit._, p. 68).

The general migration was much weaker in numbers this season in spring,
and this is doubtless owing to the prevalence of strong S.E. gales and
winds at the time of migration, moderate S.E. or easterly winds being
preferred. Still there were considerable rushes at the more favourable
localities for observation especially of Thrushes and other _Turdidæ_.

The anomalous migration recorded by Mr. Cordeaux on to part of the
English coast between Feb. 18th and May 18th,[29] with strong E. and
S.E. winds, changing occasionally by N.E. to W. and N.W., is somewhat
difficult of explanation, unless we could correlate data from the
opposite coasts at the same dates in spring of 1883; but the fact
stated by me that migration began briskly at Isle of May on March 2nd
and almost ceased by the 5th may indicate that the migration thus
retarded by adverse winds, or altered in direction thereby, passed N.
by more inland routes, avoiding the Scottish coast-line, and hugging
every sheltering hollow of land. Blown across the North Sea at the
more southerly stations, they then crept northwards silently and more
inland. Being all adult birds, and having crossed the North Sea not at
the widest part if they came with a S.E. wind, less exhaustion would
occur, and thus, passing inland, they would escape notice near the
coast.

[Footnote 29: See p. 60 of this Report.]

Before we can speak with much certainty as to the progress of spring
migrations into the further districts influenced by them, we require
more full and continuous data from Faroe and Iceland. Still, the
earliest appearance noted in Iceland of the Redwing, _Turdus iliacus_,
on April 7th, 1882, should be noted as a possible means of comparison
in that year with the returns from our own coasts. Data from our West
Coast of Scotland help us little in 1883 in spring, and even less so
in 1882, as regards _Turdidæ_. Wheatears again, in 1882, are noted not
before April 24th, and on West Coast of Scotland the migration, though
but scantily observed, began on March 9th and terminated as late as May
17th (see 1882 Report, p. 57).

The autumn migration of 1883 was pronounced, and confined principally
to end of October and November, of _Turdidæ_, _Cinclidæ_ (one of which,
seen at Isle of May, was afterwards described to me as having no brown
between the black and white of the breast); also of Snow Buntings,
Sky Larks, Robins (small numbers), Linnets, Chaffinches, Starlings,
culminating in a grand rush past of the bulk between Oct. 28th or
30th and Nov. 3rd. The heaviest rush, observed at the time of a south
wind, as compared with other years, at Isle of May, was on Oct. 13th
and 14th, a S.E. wind, according to Mr. Agnew, being usually more
favourable at that point. This October to November rush is undoubtedly
the principal feature of our returns over the whole country. Of the
expansion of the fan or wave our returns from both E. and W. coasts
give a very fair indication. It seems likely that, although most
land-stations have not returned very heavily-laden schedules,--not to
compare, for instance, with 1882,--yet, as noticed by Mr. Cordeaux,
quite as many, if not more, birds were observed at the light-ships;
that the reason for this may be found in the normal and favourable
direction of the winds prevailing in the North Sea at the time of
autumn migration, resulting in greater numbers of birds passing inland
without resting, and being thus less liable to come under observation,
except at specially suitable stations. And, if we / compare the
schedules of 1883 and those of 1882 on the West Coast of Scotland we
find that, while larger numbers are recorded at the more northerly
stations in 1883 than in 1882, there is a lighter return at more
southerly stations in the autumn of 1883 than there was in the autumn
of 1882. Thus to no inconsiderable degree the order of the statistics
of two years is reversed. It would almost appear in this way that when
a "spread fan" reaches our E. coast with S.E. winds--reaching, as it
did in 1882, from Faroe S. to the English Channel--the birds, being
tired and worn out, promptly seek shelter, and then, when rested,
pursue their migration on more southerly lines, and do not reach so
far west, except such as fail to catch up the land, and are driven
forward helplessly. This would cause comparative desertion of the more
northerly stations of the W. coast and Outer Hebrides, as in 1882.
But on the other hand, when a "closed fan" reaches our E. coast with
prevailing westerly and north-westerly winds, and, having much less
expansion to the northward, as in 1883, as regards the E. coast, it
seems that birds arriving, less exhausted with the winds best suited
for their successful passage, pass on inland, the same lines of flight
being persevered in, and thus reach further north upon the West Coast
of Scotland.

Thus the Goldcrest, in 1883, reached as far north as Dhuheartach and
Lismore in some numbers; but in 1882, when they came in such vast
hordes to our east coast, we had no records north of Rhinns of Islay,
and none others until we found them in "great numbers" at stations
south of the Firth of Clyde.

Rushes took place on August 16th at Isle of May, and again on 22nd,
with easterly wind and fog, principally of Wheatears, culminating
on night of Sept. 2nd-3rd, and being accompanied by Redstarts,
Chiffchaffs, Robins, Sedge Warblers, Wood Warblers, and Golden and
Grey Plovers; Thrushes apparently totally absent. A single adult
Blue-throated Warbler, with bright blue breast, was observed at Isle
of May. The rush was on Sept. 4th, at Pentland Skerries, with strong
N. wind. Another rush, about Sept. 15th, of Willow Warblers and
Chiffchaffs; and, on 22nd, of Robins, accompanied by a single recorded
Goldcrest. A rush of the latter took place on Oct. 10th at Isle of May.
Common Wrens, not in large numbers, also migrated on Sept. 22nd and
23rd.

Another feature of the 1883 Report is the abundance of Finches, which
usually travel with the Thrushes, but whose migration appears to be
extended over a longer period of time than that of the Thrushes in 1883.

It will be gathered from the Report that the dates of rushes on our
E. Scottish coasts were slightly later than those on the E. English
coast, averaging from twenty-four to thirty hours by the schedules, and
that the migration past the more northerly stations of Scotland were
in proportion later than in the south. And also that the dates of the
heaviest rushes on the E. coast agree fairly well with the dates of the
W. coast.

While closing our 1883 Report it is perhaps desirable to call attention
to the very great spring migration of Woodcocks, which appears to have
crossed Scotland between Clyde and Forth on March 9th, 10th, 11th,
and 12th, 1884. On the 10th our covers here (Dunipace) were full of
Woodcock. Torwood also held large numbers on 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th;
at Glenbervie, close to this, also unusual numbers were observed. From
the Ayrshire coast they are reported numerous, but not more so than
usual at this season, indicating that the Ayrshire coast, or properties
along the coast, are usually visited in the spring migration. At
Fassaroe, Bray, Co. Wicklow, Mr. Barrington made enquiries, but no
extraordinary numbers have been noted there. At Islay Mr. Ballingall
reports unusual numbers about the time mentioned.

At Ross Priory, east side of Loch Lomond, a good many were observed,
there being snow on the ground at the time; but at Arden, on the west
side, and almost immediately opposite, no additions were observed. At
Aberfoyle and neighbourhood very large numbers were observed. In East
Kilbryde Parish, to the south of Forth and Clyde isthmus, two were
seen at a locality where none were ever seen before. At Callander no
unusual number was noticed, a good many appearing here at this season,
which is usually called "The Return of the Woodcocks." Mr. Robert
Ferguson, on the 11th, flushed eight within a mile-radius, "a most
unusual circumstance here,"--at Whitehill, Rosewell, Midlothian,--and
large numbers were observed near Innerleithen in Holylee Woods and
vicinity. To the east of this county no numbers of any consequence
were noted at Tulliallan or West Grange, in Fife.[30] All the birds
seen by myself were small red Scandinavian birds, which I consider
are quite unmistakable and distinct from home-bred birds. One with an
injured muscle under the wing was brought into the house,--also a red
bird,--which was found alive in a ditch close to.

[Footnote 30: Subsequently I received a note from Mr. Seton Thomson,
of Kinnaird House, Stirlingshire, to the effect that the gamekeeper,
on March 1st, on taking a bee-line to Airth, two and a half miles
over moss-land (Airth is on the Stirlingshire side of the Firth of
Forth, where about three hundred yards of water separate it from
Tulliallan) put up half a dozen Woodcocks in a place where Woodcocks
are very rarely seen. Many also were seen about the garden at Kinnaird
House; these were observed not to be the usual Woodcocks, but a much
redder-looking bird. There appears to have been a great flight of
Woodcocks at Aberfoyle about March 15th. Mr. R. Ker's keeper flushed
five in about two square yards, and kept putting them up all over. Two
were seen also at Crutherland, by East Kilbryde, on the 12th, where a
Woodcock was never seen before.]

I would like further to have ascertained the boundaries within which
this migration was observed; how far to the north and how far to the
south of the catchment Basin of Forth it extended. Here I can do little
more than direct attention to the facts, so far as known to me. But
it seems evident that, though so abundantly observed at Airth and
Kinnaird, scarcely any increase was noticeable just across the Forth
at Tulliallan or West Grange, or in Fife; and though numerous at Ross
Priory and Loch Lomond on the east side, no increase was observed at
Arden and the west side of the loch. When the birds "lifted" from
Kinnaird and Airth, their next probable resting place would be Norway
or the continental coast, possibly Heligoland, as no notice is taken
of them in the 1884 spring returns from Isle of May or Bell Rock. Nor
does there appear to have been any corresponding movement through the
Pentland Firth.



I should like in this place to record the occurrence of the Black
Redstart in the following form. It is previously recorded by me in the
Proc. Royal Physical Society, Edinb. of April 23rd, 1884:--

  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Date.                             | 1884. Mar. 31.                 |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Locality.                         | Pentland Skerries.             |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Species.                          | _Ruticilla titys_ (Scop.).     |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Age--Adult or Young.              | Ad.                            |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Sex.                              | ♂                              |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Alone, or                         | --                             |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | with others,                      | X                              |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | of its own,                       | --                             |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | or other Species.*                | X                              |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Direction of Wind,                | S.E.                           |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | and Strength.                     | Strong.                        |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Prevailing Wind for past Few Days.| S. & S.E.                      |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  | Weather.                          | Clear on 28th. Fog on 31st.    |
  +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
  |                            =Remarks.=                              |
  |                                                                    |
  |* If with other species, name them here:--1 Robin, Sandpipers,      |
  |    1 Yellow Bunting, 1 Chaffinch, "Stonechats" (_i.e._, Wheatears),|
  |    1 G. C. Wren, 1 Common Thrush.                                  |
  +--------------------------------------------------------------------+




IRISH COAST.


In the spring of 1883 schedules were forwarded to forty-two stations,
Arklow North Light-ship having been added to those of the previous
year. Twenty-five replied.

In the autumn only thirty-five schedules were sent out, seven having
been omitted, _i.e._, Mine Head, Wicklow Head, Lough Swilly, Eagle
Island East, Slyne Head South, Loop Head, and Samphire Island.
Thirty-four were returned, one station sending no answer.

A decided improvement in filling the schedules occurred in the autumn,
the observations of some light-keepers extending over three or even
four schedules. The labour of arranging the materials for this report
and placing the entries under the head of each species has consequently
been much increased.

In addition to the schedules the light-keepers at Coningbeg light-ship,
Tuskar Rock, Rathlin Island, Killybegs, Tearaght, and Skelligs have
forwarded lists of all the birds they have observed, whether migrating
or otherwise. There is an evident disposition on the part of all to
help us as far as possible in this enquiry. The light stations are
arranged geographically--beginning at the Fastnet, in Cork, and going'
round by the east to the west coast.

The number of migrants passing in the autumn seems to have been greater
than usual. A great rush of Thrushes (including probably Redwings),
Blackbirds, and Starlings, took place at our south eastern and southern
stations between Oct. 25th and Nov. 2nd--notably at the Tuskar, on
the Wexford coast, which is the best Irish station. Smaller rushes of
these and other birds are also recorded, but it is premature at present
to analyse the movements of each species or the dates on which they
occurred. After a few years conclusions will be far more satisfactory.

The great majority of birds are killed striking on foggy, misty, or
dark nights, and it is perhaps not impossible for a great migration
to take place, and pass almost unrecorded if the night be fine and
bright. Whenever a bird has been killed striking, it is so stated, and
not left to be understood.

The bulk of the migrants appear to arrive on our south eastern coast,
except such birds as the Barnacle Goose and Snow Bunting, which are
mainly recorded from the north western stations, being rarely entered
in the schedules from the east or south coasts.

An interesting feature this year is the occurrence of several examples
of the Greenland Falcon on the west coast.

The winter of 1883-4 was exceptionally mild, and the entries due to
local migration from frost and hard weather are probably few.

Many entries no doubt refer to birds not migrating at all, but none
have been omitted, as it is difficult to know where to draw the line.
It is desirable, however, that the light-keepers should state whether
the bird is believed to be migrating or merely moving about the
district from local causes.

In the schedules for next year a special column for the direction
of flight has been added. This we think quite as important as the
direction of the wind. Birds seem rarely to fly directly with the wind.
Attention is drawn to this point in order to have it confirmed or
otherwise.

In order to diminish the errors in the identification of species the
light-keepers have been instructed to forward, when possible, a leg and
wing of every bird about which they are doubtful, and we trust they
will do so.

Some entries seem very improbable, and others are isolated and
apparently valueless. When records accumulate, both may prove useful.

In addition to the little Skellig Rock--off the coast of Kerry--the
Gannet also breeds on the Bull Rock fifteen miles further south, and a
few are also reported as breeding in the Cow Rock quite close to it.

No matter what results are arrived at from this enquiry, it is
satisfactory to be in correspondence with a number of observers on
isolated points all around the coast.

The information supplied, if corroborated during several years by
different light-keepers, cannot but be valuable, and we wish to impress
on them the necessity of continuing to assist in this investigation.

To all the light-keepers who have given their time and attention to the
subject we return our sincere thanks, especially as their assistance is
voluntary and given solely for the advancement of knowledge.

Mr. Armstrong, Secretary to the Irish Lights Board, and Captain Boxer,
R.N., Inspector of Irish Lights, have helped us in many ways by their
advice and co-operation. The Commissioners of Irish Lights have given
us every facility, and also material support by subscribing for forty
copies of the report and distributing them among the light-keepers.

                                              Alexander G. More.
                                              Richard M. Barrington.


                        List of Light-stations.

                                              Miles
                                              from
                                     Sp. Au.  shore.  Names of Observers.
   1. Fastnet, Co. Cork               o   x     8     James Walsh.
   2. Galley Head, Cork               x   x    --     John Whelan and
                                                        John Kelly.
   3. Old Head, Kinsale, Cork         x   x    --     Martin Kennedy.
   4. Mine Head, Waterford            o   *    --
   5. Dungarvan, Waterford            o   x    --     Wm. Higginbotham.
   5.*Coningbeg Lt.-ship, Wexford     x   x    10     Patrick Cullen.
   6. Barrels Rock Lt.-ship, do.      x   x     4     Michael Doyle.
   7. Tuskar Rock Lt.-ship, do.       x   x     7     Richard Hamilton.
   8. Arklow Sth. Lt.-ship, Wicklow  x   x     7     Patrick Clancy.
   8.*Arklow North Lt.-ship, do.      x   x     8     William Daly.
  10. Kish Bank Lt.-ship, Dublin      x   x     7     Michael Cunniam and
                                                       John Pinston.
  11. Howth Baily, Dublin             o   o    --
  12. Rockabill, Dublin               x   x     5     Joseph Hammond.
  13. Copeland Island, Down           x   x     3     John Walsh.
  14. Maidens, Antrim                 x   x     5     Patrick Keenan and
                                                        Michael Barry.
  15. Rathlin, Antrim                 x   x     6     John A. Murray.
  16. Innishtrahull, Donegal          x   x     6     W. H. James.
  17. Dunree Head, Donegal            o   x    --     John Stapleton.
  18. Lough Swilly, Donegal           x   *    --     Henry Redmond.
  19. Tory Island, Donegal            o   x     9     Thomas Sweeny.
  20. Arranmore, Donegal              x   x     5     Henry Williams.
  21. Rathlin O'Birne, Donegal        x   x     2     Joseph Hill and
                                                        John Scallan.
  22. Killybegs, Donegal              x   x    --     Daniel Hawkins.
  23. Oyster Island, N. Sligo         x   x     1     John Young and
                                                        Joseph Hill.
  24. Broadhaven, Mayo                o   x    --     Patrick Keenan.
  25. Eagle Island, E., Mayo          x   *     2     Henry Stocker.
  26. Eagle Island, W., Mayo          o   x     2     Matthew Healy.
  27. Blackrock, Mayo                 o   x     9     John Redmond and
                                                        John Young.
  28. Blacksod Point, Mayo            o   x    --     Robt. W. Redmond.
  29. Clare Island, Mayo              x   x     4     G. H. Brownell.
  30. Slyne Head, N., Galway          x   x     3     Robert Tyrrell.
  31. Slyne Head, S., Galway          o   *     3
  32. Arran Island, N., Galway        o   x     9     Thomas Fortune.
  33. Straw Island, Galway            x   x     9     Charles Boyle.
  34. Arran Island, S., Galway        x   x     6     John O'Donnell.
  36. Samphire Island, Kerry          o   *     ½
  37. Tearaght, Kerry                 x   x     9     Edward McCarron.
  38. Valentia, Kerry                 o   x    --     Joseph Williams.
  39. Skelligs, Kerry                 o   x     9     Thomas Kerley.
  40. Dursey Island, Cork             x   x     ½     James Keenan.

  _Abbreviations:_

    Sp. = Spring.  Au = Autumn.
    o = No reply. x = Schedule returned partly or wholly filled.
    * = No schedule sent to this station.


General Remarks of Light-Keepers.

_Fastnet._--"Autumn: On the night of Nov. 2nd, the weather being hazy,
there was a quantity of all species of birds came from the N.E., and
several of them were killed by striking the lantern; but what was most
remarkable was the quantity of large Moths, which I could compare
to nothing but a heavy fall of snow, they were so numerous. In bad
weather a few Seals frequent the rock, and a quantity of Gulls and
Sea Parrots--the latter I have frequently seen killed and eaten by
the Royal Gull. The Gannet is here all the year. No birds breed. On
Nov. 2nd, from one a.m. to seven a.m., there were killed by striking
the lantern twenty-two Thrushes, eleven Blackbirds, four Woodcocks,
seventeen Starlings, eight Linnets, five Larks, and seven Robins. Wind
S.E., light, hazy."--James Walsh.

_Galley Head._--"Spring: The flight of the Gannet and Puffin is always
to the west here. I have many times thought they must pass east by some
other route. The Grey-backed Crow and Common Crow are seen all the
year round. The Wagtail, Stonechat, and other small birds have almost
disappeared this year. The Cuckoo I have not seen or heard this year. I
have never been at a station with less birds about than this one. I am
four years here, and there has not been one case of a bird striking the
lantern."--John Whelan.

"Autumn: I arrived at this station Nov. 6th, and from that date to
the present from ninety to one hundred Sea Gulls are to be seen daily
flying about the cliffs near the Lighthouse. No birds of any other
species have been seen passing."--John Kelly. Feb., 1884.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--"Autumn: I have only seen some small birds, such
as Larks and Chaffinches, from Dec. 17th to Jan. 1st, 1884. There are
Sea Gulls, Rooks, and Grey Crows seen here all the year round, also
two Falcon Hawks. Starlings commenced to leave here the last week of
November. Larks, Wrens, Titmice, and Twite Linnets are seen all the
year round, and on the lake, three miles distant, large Duck, Widgeon,
Coot, and Waterhens. On Dec. 15th I saw a large flight of birds going
to the south at a great height, and suspect they were Golden Plover.
The Curlew never leaves the marsh three miles from here. I never saw
less birds than there is this winter."--Martin Kennedy.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--"Autumn: A great quantity of birds passed this
station last month. I have not seen so many birds killed since I came
to this station three years ago."--Patrick Cullen. Nov., 1883.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--"Spring: I have observed very few land
birds passing this year, and none about the ship in foggy weather, like
other stations I have been at."

_Tuskar Rock._--"Spring: A great absence of sea fowl this year. I
consider it owing to the scarcity of fish."

_Arklow North Light-ship._--"Autumn: As a rule all birds give the ship
a wide berth when passing, and it is very hard to tell what they are.
During thick foggy nights a large quantity of small land birds are
killed striking our lantern."--William Daly.

_Copeland Island._--"Autumn: A number of sea birds of different species
resort to this locality in the autumn and winter months for feeding
purposes, and are seen in greater or lesser numbers each day as the
weather suits and feeding is plentiful. They are Gannets, Cormorants,
Puffins, Grey and Royal Gulls, Sea-pies, 'Cranes,' Ducks, Teal, Curlew,
and Sandpipers. None of these breed in the vicinity. On Oct. 10th a
rush of Larks, Starlings, Linnets, Titmice, Thrushes, Blackbirds,
'Grey' Plover, and Snipe. Eighteen Starlings, six Blackbirds, twenty
Larks, twelve Linnets, eight Titmice, four Thrushes, three Plover,
and two Snipe killed striking lantern, and several injured but not
killed."--John Walsh.

_South Maidens._--"Spring: No birds strike the lantern in April and
May. They do not strike until October. Twelve Gannets, twenty-four
Ducks, six Sea-pies, and twelve Wild Geese are all the birds I have
seen for three months."--Patrick Keenan.--"Autumn: I arrived here Sept.
25th, 1883, and saw no birds up to Oct. 15th, save Puffins, Sea Gulls,
and Cormorants, and Sand Larks occasionally. Thrushes, Blackbirds,
and Larks are rarely seen. Wild Duck do not strike the lantern
glass."--Michael Barry.

_Rathlin Island._--"April 12th: Blackbirds, Thrushes, Skylarks, Wild
Ducks, Redshanks, Pigeons, and 'Sea Coot' seem to remain for the
season. Autumn: I have never at any time during the migratory season
for Ducks, Widgeon, Wild Geese, Barnacles, and Swan heard them passing
at night as at other stations."--John A. Murray.

_Innishtrahull._--"April 30th. A small bird with an orange tail, name
unknown, struck, not killed." Wind S.W.; a gale. "Very little birds
visited this island in May, June, and July, except a flock of Curlew."
Autumn: "There has been a great absence of birds this winter, and no
Snipe or Woodcock visited this place. Snow Buntings remained here all
the past winter."

_Dunree Head._--"Autumn: No birds resort to this station only
Cormorants, which remain all the year and breed. I have been at several
stations on the coast, but never was at a station so scarce of birds as
this."--John Stapleton.

_Tory Island._--"Autumn: Very few birds past this station. I suppose
owing to its being so far out to sea. I am informed that birds pass
more frequently the east side of the island. On the islands between
this and the mainland large flocks of Barnacle stop during the winter
months. I have not seen a Snow Bunting, Snipe, or Starling this season.
During heavy frost, snow-birds frequent the island from the mainland,
but return as soon as the thaw commences."--Thomas H. Sweeny.

_Arranmore._--"Spring: Gulls and Puffins have laid great quantities of
their eggs this year on the rock. A great many have been destroyed by
the Grey Crow."--Henry Williams.

_Killybegs._--"Autumn: The birds which breed around here are the Wild
Duck, Wild Pigeon, Lapwing, Lark, Linnet, Swallow, Snipe, Common Wren,
Thrush, Robin, Blackbird, Sparrow, Stonechat, Sand Lark, and Grey
Crow."--Daniel Hawkins.

_Broadhaven._--"Autumn: No birds strike this light."--Patrick Keenan.

_Eagle Island, East._--"Since I joined this station in Sept., 1882, up
to present date, Sept., 1883, nothing worth noting."--H. Stocker.

_Eagle Island, West._--"There was absolutely nothing of interest to
enter in schedule last autumn-. The sea has been crossing this island,
I may say daily, for the last five months, and with the exception of a
few Sea Gulls, which seem never to leave the locality, there were no
birds visited." March, 1884.--Matthew Healy.

_Blacksod._--"I have carefully looked out for birds, and seen none
worth entering. I have seen several seals."--Robert W. Redmond.

_Clare Island._--"In February very few birds are seen at this station.
No birds strike this lantern. A great number of seals frequent this
place in caves round the cliffs."--George H. Brownell.

_Slyne Head, North._--"Spring: I beg to remark that at all times
sea birds are to be seen on this coast, their numbers being chiefly
regulated by the feeding for them."--Robert Tyrrell.

_Arran Island, North._--"During the months of January and February no
birds are seen except a few Sea-pies and Sand-larks. It must be in
consequence of the very wild and stormy weather."--Thomas Fortune.

_Straw Island._--"Spring: The different species of sea fowl are very
scarce this season. I believe from the want of small fry. None breed
on this island, it being low and flat. Autumn: Birds scarcely ever
strike the lantern in consequence of the light appearing in a different
direction to the general flight of birds, being also a red light. It
is 26 feet above high water, and ten miles from land. I have remarked
a greater number of Blackbirds and Starlings this winter than since
the great frost of 1880. On Oct. 28th a flock of Wild Duck alighted,
apparently much exhausted, and remained a few hours, and went S.E.,
towards land."--Charles Boyle.

_Tearaght._--July 30th. "The following birds are still on the island,
_viz._, Guillemots, Sea Parrots, Kittiwakes, Grey Crows, Sea-pies,
Razorbills, Manx Shearwater, Stonechats, and, I think. Choughs and
Falcons (Blue Hawks). All these breed on the island. Dec. 18th, birds
remaining: Grey Linnets, Rock Pigeon, Thrushes, Mackerel Cock (on
water). Blackbirds. Residents, Titlarks and Common Wren. The 'Mackerel
Cock' is about the size of a Razorbill, but it is not the Razorbill.
Thousands of them are round the rock now. Feb. 2nd, 1884." (See under
Manx Shearwater).

_Dursey Island._--"The Gannet breed on the Bull Rock, several hundred.
On the Cow Rock, distant three-quarters of a mile from the Bull, a few
also breed. I believe the Gannet did not breed on the Bull until after
the Skellig light was erected." [This was in 1826. R. M. B.]--Michael
Shea. "Very few birds breed on this island, except the Wild Pigeon,
Jackdaw, and a few Sea Gulls. On the Bull Rock, four miles N.W. of
Dursey Head, the Gannet and Puffin breed in great numbers, coming about
March 1st and leaving Oct. 1st."--James Keenan.


Eagle.

_Clare Island._--"The Eagles still inhabit the cliffs, and have
been as usual destructive to young lambs and fowls belonging to the
inhabitants. In December they make very bold, and not having sea birds
to feed on, are often observed near the villages, principally when the
wind is east."


Greenland Falcon.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Nov. 9th. "Two grey speckled Hawks at three p.m.,
wind strong W., showery. One shot; it measured four feet from tip to
tip of wings, and had down under its feathers like a sea bird."

_Slyne Head, North._--Dec. 2nd, one White Hawk, at two p.m.; wind N.,
clear. First seen here, and very tame.

_Tearaght._--Dec. 12th, Mr. P. Sheehy, assistant-keeper, saw a White
Hawk; wind N.W., strong breeze, and gloomy. March 23rd, 1884, one white
spotted Falcon shot. April 2nd, another much smaller and whiter shot.

[This has been an extraordinary year for the occurrence of the
Greenland Falcon, no less than eight having been obtained at various
points along the west coast of Ireland from Donegal to Cork, and one
Iceland Falcon at West Port.--R. M. B.]


Hawks.

_Fastnet._--Sept. 14th, one flying east.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 17th, two Falcons passing S.W.

_Tuskar Rock._--Feb. 25th and 27th, March 3rd and 10th, one Hawk seen
at daylight; 26th, 'two Sparrow Hawks; Oct. 13th and 15th, one seen.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--May 4th, one Sparrow Hawk, 7.20 a.m., on
lantern; Feb. 22nd, 1884, one hovering about ship nine a.m.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 30th, three Hawks hovering about ship;
flew to N.W.

_Rockabill._--Aug. 31st, one caught on balcony.

_Rathlin Island._--June 25th, one Sparrow Hawk at noon; Aug. 28th, one
Sparrow Hawk and one Falcon Hawk; Dec. 8th and 20th, two Falcon Hawks
at noon.

_Innishtrahull._--March 23rd, one Hawk, 11.50 a.m.; wind strong W.
April 15th, one, two p.m.; wind N., fresh. May 15th, a Grey Hawk, at
two a.m.; wind N.W., misty. During August several "Brown Hawks," which
remained most of the month; Dec. 8th, one Brown Hawk.

_Lough Swilly._--April 3rd, one Hawk, four p.m.; May 14th, one Sparrow
Hawk; June 22nd, two Hawks.

_Arranmore._--April 12th, Peregrine Hawks breed on island; 15th, one
Sparrow Hawk; May 6th, four Hawks; June 28th, one; Sept. 4th, one.

_Killybegs._--Aug. 14th, one hovering about.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Dec. 10th, two Falcons flying N.E., high; wind S.W.,
gale. Dec. 19th, one Falcon, one p.m.; wind W., fresh, gloomy. Dec.
24th, two Sparrow Hawks, flying S.E.; wind S., gale.

_Clare Island._--Two Kestrel Hawks build their nest, as usual, in the
vicinity of the Lighthouse.

_Arran Island, South._--April 8th, four "Holland Hawks," six a.m.; wind
S.S.E. They remain here.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 30th, one Falcon? one p.m.; wind N.W., clear.
March 2nd, two Sparrow Hawks, also on March 3rd. They come and go
occasionally the year round. Oct. 29th, one Hawk, colour grey, portions
white and black, beak white, and white spot on crown of head. A pair of
Falcons and "Sparrow Hawks" breed on the island.

_Valentia._--Sept. 1st, two small Hawks; wind strong S.E. Also on Oct.
14th and Nov. 8th.


Owl.

_Innishtrahull._--Feb. 15th, one "Brown Owl," two p.m.; wind N.E.,
gale, squally. Nov. 8th, "I have been told another snowy Owl was seen
on the island about the 14th of last month, but not so large" as the
specimen shot on Nov. 19th, 1882. "It was not observed by me." (See
last year's Report).

_Killybegs._--April 10th, one "Screech Owl," shot at six p.m. Rose out
of a swamp in vicinity, an unusual visitor.


Thrushes.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 22nd, ten Thrushes; Nov. 2nd, twenty-two killed
striking.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 3rd, large numbers from sunrise to sunset,
coming from the north. Dec. 16th, some hundreds; wind N., frosty.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 26th, one alighted on ship; 28th, flocks
about the ship from 9 p.m. until midnight; fifteen killed striking;
wind light, S., gloomy. 29th, a great number about ship during night,
many killed and fell overboard; gloomy. They made for the land. 30th,
three struck at 3 a.m., killed. 31st, two about light 10 p.m.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 2nd, a great number of song Thrushes in vicinity all
day. Oct. 26th, plentiful in fields about station. 28th, one "Redwing
Thrush" struck 11.20 p.m.

_Tuskar Rock._--Feb. 24th and 25th, Thrushes during day and night, some
struck; fog and mist. Oct. 9th and 10th, Thrushes all night; a great
number killed and disabled. Oct. 27th to Nov. 2nd, great numbers of
Thrushes passed, many killed; weather foggy, with mist. On Oct. 29th,
at 7 a.m., I found two large mountain Thrushes, with grey breasts and
dark wings (Fieldfares?). Most of the Thrushes that are killed are
small mountain Thrushes, never seen here except in winter, mostly in
frosty weather. They have no regular round spots on breast--a sort of
striped head and a great deal of yellow under the wings (Redwings?).
Only twenty of the native Thrushes killed.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--March 2nd, five on deck. April 22nd, three.
Oct. 10th, one killed; weather hazy. Oct. 28th and 29th, six killed,
striking; wind S., cloudy.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Sept. 16th, a large flock hovering about
ship during the day. 19th, Thrushes killed striking about midnight.
Oct. 29th and 30th, large numbers striking lantern; calm, overcast,
hazy.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 8th, one flighted at 10 a.m. 28th, one
killed striking 10.30 p.m.; weather gloomy.

_Rockabill._--Jan. 13th, Thrushes in night, some struck; weather misty.
Feb. 17th, some Thrushes from sunset to midnight. Oct. 26th and 27th,
large quantity killed in night; weather hazy, with light rain. Nov.
15th, Thrushes during night, some struck. Nov. 29th, five killed,
overcast and cloudy. Dec. 28th, several struck at 8 p.m., mist and fog.
Dec. 31st, two killed.

_Copeland Island._--Oct. 10th, four killed striking, others injured;
wind N., light, drizzling rain.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 15th, twenty-four at midnight, sixteen of them
killed against lantern; weather hazy, wind W., fresh.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 1st, three at lantern; wind fresh, S. 2nd, three
at lantern, 11.30 p.m., misty. Nov. 5th, three at lantern.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 17th, four struck lantern, 10 p.m.; wind W., gale.

_Killybegs._--April 1st, five Thrushes about all day. Oct. 24th, three
killed striking; wind S.W., fresh, drizzling rain. Nov. 30th, two
killed, drizzling rain. Dec. 19th, three killed, thick drizzle.

_Oyster Island, North._--Jan. 10th, 1884, two "Missel Thrushes" in
garden; flew S.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Dec. 23rd, four Thrushes flying N., high; wind S.,
fresh.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 9th, eight; wind S.E. 30th, six; wind N.E.

_Arran Island, North._--Nov. 4th, two Thrushes killed in morning. Dec.
10th, two Thrushes 10 a.m.; wind W.S.W., gale.

_Tearaght._--Oct. 27th, one Thrush killed striking, 11 p.m.; wind
fresh, S.E., foggy. Nov. 22nd, two or three, 2 p.m.; wind N.W., strong,
hail showers.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 20th, one at 1 p.m.; wind N., fresh, misty. Oct.
21st, three, remained during month. A couple about rock in December.

_Dursey Island._--Oct. 10th, ten going east, 8 a.m.; wind W.


Fieldfare.

_Fastnet._--Sept. 18th, four flying N.E.; gloomy. Oct. 22nd, five;
31st, six. Nov. 1st, four. Dec. 16th, three.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 14th, small flocks in fields; 18th and 26th, several.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 29th, one, going S.; wind S.W.


Blackbird.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 22nd, thirteen. Nov. 2nd, eleven killed striking.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 3rd, large numbers. Nov. 15th, from 100 to
150 seen this day. It is remarkable to see so many of these birds; wind
S., strong.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 7th, three alighted on ship, 9.30 p.m.;
wind E.N.E., rain. Oct. 10th, one caught on deck at 2 a.m. 28th,
flocks, 9 p.m., until midnight, about the ship in great numbers;
gloomy, wind light S., twenty killed. 29th, a great number about light,
8 p.m., until midnight; many struck and fell overboard. 31st, four at
10 p.m., hovering about light. Nov. 1st, two struck at 9 p.m., killed.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Oct. 29th, one male killed against lantern,
2.15 a.m.

_Tuskar Rock._--Feb. 24th, Blackbirds during day and night, fog and
mist; some struck lantern. 25th, 27th, and 28th, ditto. March 2nd,
four males and seven females. Oct. 9th and 10th, constantly striking
all night; a great number killed. Oct. 27th to Nov. 2nd, great numbers
passed at intervals during day and night; weather misty. Numbers
killed, 100 on Oct. 28th and 80 on 29th, besides hundreds disabled.
Most of the Blackbirds are female; they are of a dull brown colour.
Nov. 7th, two killed; 10th, one seen.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April 28th, one; wind light, S.E. Oct.
29th, twenty-six killed striking; wind S., light, cloudy.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 30th, Blackbird, 11 p.m. to 11.50
p.m., flying round lantern; did not strike; weather hazy. Sept. 16th,
large flock about ship. 19th, Blackbirds striking at midnight; weather
hazy, with rain. Oct. 29th and 30th, large numbers killed striking,
calm, overcast, hazy. Nov. 30th, two killed at midnight; weather hazy,
with rain.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 28th, two Blackbirds. Nov. 7th, two;
13th, several, from 6 p.m. until midnight, flying about lantern; clear.

_Rockabill._--Jan. 13th, Blackbirds during night, some struck, weather
misty. Feb. 17th, Blackbirds, sunset to midnight; rain and mist, some
struck. Oct. 26th and 27th, large quantity struck lantern in night;
weather hazy, with light rain. Nov. 15th, a dozen killed; 28th, six
killed. Dec. 28th, four; 31st three. In all cases weather overcast or
misty.

_Copeland Island._--Blackbirds breed here, two pairs. Oct. 10th, six
killed striking, others injured; wind light N., drizzling rain.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 16th, four struck, 2 a.m., not killed; weather
hazy.

_Rathlin Island._--Oct. 31st, one killed striking.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 1st, two at lantern; wind fresh S., gloomy,
misty. 2nd, one at lantern 11.30 p.m.; wind S. 5th, two at lantern, 8
p.m.; wind light N.E.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 18th, two struck, one killed, 9 p.m.; wind W.N.W.,
gale.

_Killybegs._--April 1st, three about all day. Nov. 30th, one killed
striking, drizzling rain. Dec. 18th, one killed; 19th, another, weather
thick.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--Oct. 22nd, four at 8 a.m.; wind S.W., fresh,
misty, flying S., high.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 9th, six; wind S.E.

_Arran Island, South._--May 15th, thirty "Blackbirds," 6 p.m.; wind
N.W. They remain here. Dec. 13th, two struck, not killed, 11 p.m.; wind
W.N.W.

_Tearaght._--Nov. 20th, one Blackbird at 3 p.m.; wind W., fresh.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 20th, two at 1 p.m.; wind N., fresh, misty. Remained
during month. A couple about rock in December.


Ring Ouzel.

_Rathlin Island._--April 18th, "one Blackbird," at 4 p.m.; wind strong
S.E. This bird had a white throat. It was shot.


Robin.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 27th, eight. Nov. 2nd, seven killed striking. Barrels
Rock Light-ship,--Aug. 29th, one "Robin Redbreast," rested on ship.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 1st, two about all day. Nov. 13th, one seen.

_Straw Island._--April 11th, two "Redbreasts," 9 a.m., calm. Passed
island for shore.

_Arran Island, South._--July 1st, eighteen Robin Redbreasts, 9 p.m.;
wind S.S.E., four killed.


"Blackcap."

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April 4th, three "Blackcaps" dead on deck,
7 a.m.; wind fresh S.W., rain.


"Sallypickers" (Willow Wren or Chiffchaff).

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 29th, eight "Sallypickers" flying
round ship. May 1st, three ditto.


"Stonechat" (Wheatear).

_Galley Head._--April 4th, saw "Stonechicks," the first this year.

_Fastnet._--Sept. 14th, five young ones. Oct. 1st, twelve; 9th, twenty.
Dec. 4th, seven; 16th, two.

_Tuskar Rock._--Aug. 9th, three killed striking. Oct. 5th,
"Stonechatters."

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 21st, one "Stonechatter" on deck 6
a.m.

_Rathlin Island._--April 28th, flocks of Stonechats, picked up five;
wind fresh S.E., misty, rain. May 2nd, six at 7 a.m.; 20th, seven.;
21st, ten all day about the station. Foggy and gloomy. June 3rd and
19th, three to six seen.

_Innishtrahull._--April 28th and 29th, "Stonechickers," 2 a.m.; wind N.
one day and S. the other. 30th, three, one struck lantern, killed; a
gale from S.W. May 3rd, two; 5th, one. Sept. 20th, two struck lantern,
not killed. Nov. 5th, two at lantern at midnight; gloomy, misty.

_Arranmore._--April 3rd, four "Stonechatters arrived to build."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 31st, April 1st and 6th, one to six
Stonechats.

_Killybegs._--I noticed during April and May some "Stonechatters."

_Clare Island._--March 1st, some "Stonechatters" flying S., 11.30 a.m.

_Slyne Head, North._--April 1st, Stonechats arrive and increase in
number from this date. Aug. 2nd, Stonechats disappear; have not seen in
what direction they come or go.

_Straw Island._--April 5th, two Stonechats; wind N.W., very light,
clear. Remained on island.

_Arran Island, South._--May 18th, twenty Stonechatters. They remain
here.

_Tearaght._--May 26th, about half a dozen Stonechats arrived about this
date. Sept. 20th, Stonechats left about this date.


Redstart.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 13th, one about garden, being the only one seen in
vicinity for seven years.

_Tearaght._--Oct. 27th, two Redstarts, male and female. May have been
on island some time previous. Remained about a month.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 13th, four birds of a slatish colour, red on back
near tail, about the size of a Titlark; wind S.W., fresh. Fog and
drizzle. Stayed all the month.


Goldencrested Wren.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 12th, five Goldencrested Wrens, one killed
striking; wind strong, N.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--April 27th, one alighted on ship, 8 a.m.;
29th, another ditto.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 1st, two struck lantern; and on 2nd, 9th, and 10th
one or two, but none killed.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct. 9th, one; 25th, one; 26th, two; 29th, two killed.
Nov. 2nd, two seen.

_Copeland Island._--April 7th, six killed striking; weather clear, wind
S.E.

_Arran Island, South._--June 20th, sixty "Goldencrested Wrens," 7 a.m.;
calm, blue sky.


Wren.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 9th, Wrens.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Jan. 20th, five "Common Wrens," going S.W.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 10th, two Wrens killed, 10 p.m.; wind
moderate, N.N.E., clear.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--April 26th, one alighted on ship. May 8th,
one ditto. Oct. 8th, one alighted on ship.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 4th, "Wrens of all sorts," constantly striking
all night; several killed. June 24th, Wrens, 8 a.m. to 10 a.m. Aug.
3rd, six "Common Wrens," flying about rock, fog. Sept. 15th, three,
one killed, fog. Oct. 22nd and 26th, one seen. Oct. 29th, "a small grey
bird not much larger than a Wren with a black head," killed.

_Rockabill._--Feb. 8th, Wrens during night, some struck; weather misty,
wind S.E. Oct. 26th and 27th, Wrens about lantern in night; weather
misty. Nov. 15th, some killed striking; wind S., rain. Dec. 31st, four
killed.

_Rathlin Island._--April 28th, flocks of Wrens, picked up twelve; wind
fresh S.E., misty, rain. Aug. 14th, one killed striking, 11 p.m.; wind
light S.E., misty.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 22nd, two Wrens at lantern, gloomy; wind N.W.,
gale.

_Killybegs._--Nov. 15th, three Wrens, with other small birds.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Nov. 3rd, four Wrens, 11 a.m.; wind W.N.W., light,
one killed.

_Tearaght._--The Wren is resident.

_Valentia._--Dec. 12th, four "Common Wrens"; wind light W.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 20th, several "Common Wrens" seen occasionally
during winter. They breed here.


Tits.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 29th, 9 p.m. to 4 a.m., Tits striking, twelve
killed; wind strong south, rain, and fog. May 8th, "Titmice" constantly
striking, eight killed, from 11 p.m. to 4 a.m.; wind N.W., and fog.
13th, constantly striking during night, twelve killed, fog, and mist.
15th, five killed, fog and mist. 19th, one seen. Sept. 16th, two killed.

_Copeland Island._--April 25th, one "Titmouse," killed striking. Oct.
10th, eight killed striking; wind N., light, drizzling rain.


Wagtail.

_Dungarvan._--Jan. 14th, one "Golden Wagtail," on rocks.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Sept. 18th, one rested on ship, and flew N.

_Rathlin Island._--One "Water Wagtail," seen on Aug. 12th, Oct. 10th,
and Dec. 27th.

_Innishtrahull._--May 5th, one Wagtail seen. Nov. 3rd, two.

_Arranmore._--May 3rd, one Grey Wagtail.

_Tearaght._--March 3rd, one Wagtail, 9 a.m.; wind light S.E.; remained
only a few minutes. May 24th, another. None observed previous to this
year.

_Skelligs._--One seen in July; very rare.


Larks.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 9th, sixteen, flying west; 22nd, seven; 31st, eight.
Nov. 1st, seven. Nov. 2nd, five killed striking.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--March 10th, large numbers from sunrise to sunset,
with Linnets and other small birds.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--April 26th, two Larks killed, 9 p.m.; wind
light, rain. Oct. 9th, three caught on deck, 5 a.m.; 10th, two caught
on deck, 2 a.m.; 28th, flocks from 9 p.m. to midnight, about the ship.
Light S. wind, gloomy; 29th, numbers about the light, 8 p.m. until
midnight, many struck and fell overboard. Nov. 2nd, three struck
lantern, killed.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 22nd, small straggling flocks all day.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Sept. 16th, flock of three or four dozen
rested on ship, flying N. Oct. 19th, one seen.

_Tuskar Rock._--Feb. 27th and 28th, and March 1st and 2nd, many Larks,
some caught; weather foggy and overcast, with mist. Sept. 9th, a flock
at 8 a.m.; 25th, another flock. Oct. 8th, three killed striking;
9th and 10th, constantly striking all night, many killed, mist and
fog. At 8 a.m. on 10th, a large flock went west; 13th, a flock;
26th, thirty-five Larks killed striking, fog. Oct. 30th to Nov. 3rd,
constantly striking at night, some killed; in day time about rock, and
flying to N.W., weather misty.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--March 2nd, six flying round ship. Flocks
noted on Oct. 7th, 10th, 11th, 15th, and Nov. 7th and 8th; and on Oct.
20th, 21st, 27th; and 29th, a few passed. Seven killed on Oct. 10th and
11th, weather foggy. Oct. 29th four killed.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Nov. 26th, a large flock going N.W.; wind
light N.W., clear.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Oct. 26th, five passing N.W. Nov. 13th,
several about lantern from 6 p.m. until midnight. Dec. 23rd, three
flying west; 27th, one killed striking lantern, weather clear; 31st,
two killed striking, weather gloomy.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 26th and 27th, Larks about lantern in night; weather
misty.

_Copeland Island._--Oct. 10th, twenty killed striking, others injured;
wind north, light; drizzling rain.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 16th, eight "common Larks" killed striking; wind
W.N.W., strong, weather thick.

_Rathlin Island._--Oct. 29th, two killed striking; 30th, five killed,
overcast, misty.

_Innishtrahull._--March 13th, eight struck, not killed, at 4 a.m.; wind
S.W., fresh, fog and mist. May 5th, one seen. Nov. 1st, two, 10.30
p.m., at lantern, gloomy, misty. Nov. 3rd, one; 5th, one at lantern at
midnight. Dec. 8th, three Skylarks at 8 a.m.; wind S.W., fresh.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Skylarks noted on Feb. 2nd, which is earlier than
on previous years. On March 30th and 31st, April 1st, 3rd, and 6th,
from four to eight.

_Killybegs._--April 22nd, several Skylarks observed about this time.

_Oyster Island, North._--Dec. 26th, four Skylarks in a field; flew
south.

_Clare Island._--March 31st, about a dozen Larks. Oct. 31st, a flock of
Larks flying about station; wind S.S.W., light. During November, small
flocks at intervals.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 11th, eight Larks; wind E.S.E.

_Straw Island._--March 22nd, eight "Field Larks" at noon; wind S.,
strong. Remained on island.


Titlark.

_Fastnet._--Nov. 1st, fifteen.

_Tuskar Rock._--Aug. 13th, Titlarks flying on rock. Oct. 21st, five,
remained some time.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April 5th, one going east. Sept. 18th, two
flying round ship; 21st, two flying east; 25th, five flying N.W. Nov.
3rd, a flock flying N.W.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 21st, two on deck, 6 a.m. Sept. 20th,
some Titlarks killed striking, hazy, with rain.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--May 11th, three. June 20th, two. Oct. 8th,
four alighted on deck, 10 a.m.

_Copeland Island._--April 12th, two Titlarks killed striking. They nest
on island.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 17th, six Titlarks, 10 p.m.; weather foggy.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 23rd, three, at 8 a.m.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 3rd, five Titlarks; 5th, one; 22nd, three.

_Lough Swilly._--May 2nd, two, 4 p.m.; wind N., strong.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 2nd, one Titlark striking at 4 a.m.;
caught by keeper.

_Tearaght._--The Titlark is resident.

_Skelligs._--Titlarks common all the year; they breed.


Yellowhammer.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Nov. 16th, Yellow Buntings around walls of station;
22nd, large flocks of Buntings all day.


Snow Bunting.

_Rathlin Island._--May 16th, "shot a bird very like a Snow Bunting."
Oct. 14th, thirty; wind N.W., squally. Some seen also on 15th, 17th,
18th; Nov. 7th, and one on 29th.

_Innishtrahull._--Jan. 24th, continuous flocks of Snow Buntings for the
rest of the month. Dec. 4th, flock at 11 a.m., apparently just come to
island, and are on it ever since; wind N., gale. Seen on 7th, 8th, 9th,
and on 25th, Snow Buntings all day; wind S.W., fresh.

_Arranmore._--Jan. 23rd, Snow Buntings all day. Feb. 18th, eight. They
leave in spring. April 27th, one shot. Aug. 18th, one Snow Bunting at 4
p.m.; wind S., fresh. Sept. 1st, eight. Dec. 8th and 11th, a few.

_Killybegs._--An occasional Snow Bunting visits us, but I have seen
none this winter nor during the winter of 1882-3.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Oct. 30th, about thirty alighted on rock; wind
S.S.E., fresh, misty. Nov. 30th, about forty, 9.30 a.m.; wind N.,
light. Dec. 4th, twenty. Jan. 10th, 1884, forty on rock; wind strong
S.W., misty.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 5th, six arrived on island at 2 p.m.; wind
S., misty.

_Tearaght._--Feb. 10th, Snow Buntings mentioned in last report, still
on island; left about March 1st. Sept. 30th, about six, but may have
been on the island some time previously. Remained about a fortnight.

N.B. _Arranmore._--"Two Lapland Buntings shot, one on May 1st, the
other on 4th, very rare, and the oldest person has never seen the same
species before." [These were perhaps some stage of plumage of the Snow
Bunting.--A. G. M. and R. M. B.]


Chaffinch.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 29th, ten. Nov. 1st, nine. Jan. 5th, 1884, seven about
the rock.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 16th, some hundreds; wind N., frosty.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 27th, six about ship, one caught on deck;
28th, one alighted on ship; 29th, a great number about light, many
killed, and fell overboard; gloomy. Nov. 13th, one rested on ship.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct 5th, Chaffinches; 13th, 19th, and 26th a few. Oct.
30th to Nov. 3rd, several during the night. Nov. 13th, four died on
rock.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--Sept. 21st, two. Oct. 29th, a flock; 31st,
two.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Sept. 13th, six hovering about ship. Nov.
12th, five.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--July 14th, three at 4.30 p.m., stayed on ship
until sunset, and then left. Oct. 8th, three alighted on deck, 10 a.m.
Oct. 26th, one alighted. Nov. 7th, four alighted.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 11th, three "Finches," wind E.S.E.

_Tearaght._--Oct. 26th, about a dozen "Finches, several kinds," but
cannot give the names. Remained about a fortnight.


Sparrow.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 1st, one Sparrow caught.

_Rathlin Island._--June 5th, 13th, and 28th, a few Sparrows noted
(perhaps breeding).

_Killybegs._--May 10th, observed about thirty Sparrows. They build in
old ruins in the neighbourhood. Aug. 11th, about sixty perched on stays
of signal mast. Sept. 18th, 19th, and 20th, Sparrows flying towards
S.W.; wind E. to E.S.E.

_Straw Island._--March 30th, two house Sparrows, 10 a.m.; calm, wind S.

_Arran Island, South._--July 26th, forty Sparrows, 8 a.m.; wind W.N.W.,
clear.


Goldfinch.

_Arran Island, South._--April 3rd, six Goldfinches, 3 p.m.; wind W.S.W.
They remain. July 28th, Goldfinches at 10 a.m. Nov. 12th, ten, at 9
a.m.; wind W.S.W., hovering about.

_Valentia._--Oct. 4th, 10th, and Dec. 15th, two or three Goldfinches.
They breed on the island.

_Skelligs._--Seen in October. Breed on mainland near.


Linnets.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 9th, Linnets flying west. Nov. 2nd, eight killed
striking. Jan. 5th, 1884, five, all day.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--March 10th, large numbers, sunrise to sunset.
Dec. 5th, two hundred to three hundred.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 9th, four killed on deck at 5 a.m.; 14th,
two going N.E.; 22nd, one alighted on ship.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 1st, flocks of Grey Linnets coming from S.E. Nov.
29th, flocks of Grey Linnets all day about station.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--March 21st, six flying north, and a few
at end of March. May 8th, one. Sept. 27th, six. Oct. 8th, one; 19th,
seven; 22nd, large flocks. Nov. 12th, five. Dec. 6th, one alighted on
ship. Jan. 14th, 1884, one.

_Tuskar Rock._--May 13th, Grey Linnets, 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., striking;
mist and fog.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--Oct, 26th, one Green Linnet flying about.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Sept. 17th, some Grey Linnets at 8 a.m.,
hovering about; weather hazy. Sept. 20th, some Linnets killed striking;
hazy, with rain. Nov. 13th, Linnets about ship; wind S.E., light, clear.

_Rockabill._--Feb. 8th, Linnets during night, some struck; misty, wind
S.E.

_Copeland Island._--Oct. 10th, twelve killed striking, others injured;
wind N., light, drizzling rain.

_Rathlin Island._--May 9th, twenty Linnets seen; 16th, four flocks.
June 4th, twenty Grey Linnets; 14th, thirty; 23rd, seven. Entries occur
Oct. 20th, 22nd, 23rd, 24th, 29th; Nov. 3rd, 18th, 20th, 24th, 27th,
and frequently during December. Numbers vary up to 150, and direction
of flight when entered was south or west, and seemed independent of
direction of wind.

_Innishtrahull._--Jan. 24th, continuous flocks of Green Linnets for the
rest of month. Nov. 7th, fifty at one p.m., wind S.W., light; 22nd,
four at lantern, wind N.W., gale, gloomy.

_Dunree Head._--Nov. 16th, great flocks of Grey Linnets flying about
all day.

_Arranmore._--Feb. 23rd, six Grey Linnets. They come daily. Dec. 19th,
a flock of Grey Linnets.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Sept. 21st, ten Grey Linnets alighted, and flew to
N.E.

_Killybegs._--I noticed during April and May nine or ten Grey Linnets.
Aug. 11th, Linnets perched on stays of signal mast, 6 a.m. Sept. 18th,
19th, and 20th, continuous flocks flying S.W. all day, arriving and
departing after resting; wind E. to E.S.E.

_Oyster Island, North._--Nov. 13th, fifty passing N.; wind S.

_Clare Island._--April 15th, Linnets during the day.

_Slyne Head, North._--July 9th, twenty Linnets appeared 10 a.m., flying
high. Nov. 11th, nine Linnets; wind E.S.E.

_Straw Island._--Aug. 23rd, a large number of Grey Linnets going south;
flying low, calm.

_Arran Island, South._--April 1st, fifty Linnets; wind E., drizzling
rain. Oct. 6th, forty Linnets hovering about, 4 p.m.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 30th, twelve Grey Linnets, mentioned in last report,
left about this date. Sept. 22nd, about twelve Grey Linnets, 8 a.m.;
wind light E. Oct. 29th, five Grey Linnets, one killed striking, four
taken alive; foggy.


"Small Birds."

_Fastnet._--Sept. 21st, twenty; 28th, ditto. Oct. 3rd, a flock passing
high to N.E. Oct. 7th, "mixed birds" striking glass; fog and mist.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--June 29th, two small birds flying W.; rain and
fog. July 7th, flock of "small land birds" going S.E. to N.W.; weather
hazy. Nov. 26th, flock of small birds, name unknown, flying low to
N.W., at 11 a.m.

_Rockabill._--Feb. 8th, several small birds during night.

_Killybegs._--Sept. 18th, 19th, and 20th, small birds. Sparrows,
Linnets, and others unknown to me, flying in a S.W. direction all
day; wind E. to E.S.E., cloudy, and misty. Constantly arriving, and
departing after resting. Nov. 15th, about thirty small birds remained
nearly all day, left at dusk.

_Clare Island._--April 15th, Linnets and "other small yellow birds"
during the day.

_Valentia._--Sept. 24th, four Grey Linnets.


Bullfinch.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 31st, nine.

_Killybegs._--"I noticed during April and May several piping
Bullfinches."

_Slyne Head, North._--Dec. 7th, three "Bullfinches," wind E.S.E.


Starling.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 27th, eleven; 29th, five striking. Nov. 1st, five.
Nov. 2nd, seventeen killed striking.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 3rd, large flock coming from N. Oct. 30th,
some hundreds of Starlings all going inland.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 9th, flocks of Starlings, 6 a.m., flying
N.E. Oct. 28th and 29th, flocks about ship, nights gloomy, seven
killed, but many struck and fell overboard; 30th, seven rested on ship,
8 a.m. Nov. 2nd, two killed, 9 p.m.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 5th, small flocks; 17th and 22nd, ditto; 29th, one
struck lantern. They are late this year.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Oct. 28th, one rested on ship; 29th,
another. Nov. 1st, a few.

_Tuskar Rock._--Feb. 24th, 25th, 27th, 28th, and March 3rd, Starlings,
a considerable number struck lantern, several killed; weather foggy
and overcast, with mist. Oct. 9th, five killed, misty; 10th, passing
all night. Oct. 28th to Nov. 2nd, Starlings passed, with Blackbirds,
Thrushes, Larks, and Chaffinches, some killed; weather foggy with mist.
Nov. 13th, one.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--Oct. 16th, a flock of "Stares;" 26th, a
flock; 29th, four killed striking; 31st, one seen.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 30th, Starlings around lantern, 11
p.m. to 11.50 p.m., did not strike; weather hazy. Sept. 19th, "Stares"
striking at midnight; wind light S.E., hazy. Oct. 30th, "Stares"
striking, overcast, calm. Nov. 13th, "Stares" about ship, 3 p.m. Nov.
30th, some Starlings striking, one killed; hazy, rain. Dec. 5th, a
large flock going W., 7.45 a.m.; wind N.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--May 14th, five, at 10.15 p.m., about lantern;
weather foggy. Oct. 7th, seven struck, killed, and a great number
fell overboard; weather foggy, wind light N.W. Oct. 27th, numbers of
Starlings, four killed striking, 9 p.m. Some fell overboard; clear,
wind fresh N.N.W. Nov. 7th, four, at 11 a.m., left ship 2 p.m.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 31st, four killed striking; weather gloomy, wind
light S.E.

_Copeland Island._--Starlings appear the first week in April to breed
here. Oct. 10th, eighteen killed striking, others injured; wind light
N., drizzling rain.

_Rathlin Island._--April 3rd, seventy, going N., 3 p.m.; 14th, four,
breeding here. Entries of two to one hundred and fifty occur from Oct.
24th to Dec. 25th; most seen on Oct. 26th and Dec. 1st. Directions of
flight when entered generally S. or W.

_Innishtrahull._--March 14th, four, at 11 a.m.; a gale from S.W. Oct.
30th, three struck, not killed; wind S.E., light, cloudy. Dec. 20th,
four; wind N.W., strong.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Nov. 12th, about two hundred came from mainland,
and returned again after some time.

_Killybegs._--The Starling, which was commonly seen here in winter, is
now very rare. I have seen none at all this winter.

_Oyster Island, North._--Nov. 13th, fifty passing W.; wind S.

_Blackrock, Mayo._--Oct. 3rd, about twenty alighted on rock, 9 a.m.;
wind N., fresh, clear. Oct. 4th, one killed striking, at 1 a.m.

_Clare Island._--During November a few occasionally in vicinity of
lighthouse.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 28th, eight Starlings, four killed, 10 p.m.;
wind N.E., rain. Dec. 10th, nine;-wind N.

_Straw Island._--Aug. 31st, four Starlings, 1 p.m., going S.W., low;
wind fresh W. Also on Sept. 15th, and Oct. 13th, sixteen to twenty,
going south, low.

_Arran Island, South._--April 2nd, thirty Starlings, going N., twenty
struck, none killed; wind S. Oct. 30th, thirty "Stares," 11 a.m.;
wind S., blue sky, five struck, two killed. "Stares" remained here.
Dec. 13th, six "Stares," 10 p.m., four killed striking; wind W.S.W.,
drizzling rain.

_Tearaght._--Jun. 30th, twelve, and again on Feb. 18th. Did not leave
until about March 1st.

_Valentia._--Dec. 4th, fifteen; wind light N.

_Skelligs._--Oct. 20th, six Starlings, 11 a.m., wind N., fresh, fog;
21st, two. Did not see them after this date. Bare here.

_Dursey Island._--Oct. 2nd, twenty going north; 22nd, large flock at 2
p.m., going N.W.; wind N.W.


Chough.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 30th, three Choughs. In my last report I called these
"daws." Choughs come and go occasionally all the year. They breed here.

_Skelligs._--They breed here; May to August.


Raven.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 7th, two coming from N.E.; rarely seen here.

_Copeland Island._--Aug. 20th, six alighted on island at 9 a.m.

_Arranmore._--Feb. 7th, two, at 10 a.m. Remain all the year. May 8th,
two. Sept. 11th, two. Oct. 18th, one.

_Arran Island, South._--Dec. 26th, three Ravens. They remain about here.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 20th, two Ravens about rock during month, also
during October, November, and December.


Hooded Crow.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Oct. 26th, ten Grey Crows.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 10th, seven. Jan. 4th, two in fields.

_Rathlin Island._--April 4th, twenty, to be seen every day. They remain
all the year. Aug. 15th, one.

_Lough Swilly._--April 10th, two Grey Crows.

_Arranmore._--April 26th, one passing.

_Killybegs._--Oct. 10th, four perched on cliffs.

_Straw Island._--Feb. 22nd, forty Grey Crows at noon; calm. Oct. 21st,
four going west; wind N., strong.

_Tearaght._--Feb. 13th, one Grey Crow found dead, partly devoured. They
come and go occasionally all the year.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 20th, four during month; also during October,
November, and December.

_Dursey Island._--Flocks of two to fifteen Grey Crows on April 2nd, May
20th, and July 11th; flight E. or N.E. Sept. 8th, four going east.


Rook.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 27th, one hundred to one hundred and fifty;
came from east.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--April 28th, two flying N.E.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 18th, one "Crow" flying west; 25th, six seen.
April 6th, a large flock of Rooks going west.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--March 18th, two "Crows" going N.W.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Dec. 1st, eight "Crows" flying low to N.W.,
11.30 a.m.

_Copeland Island._--April 25th, a large flock of some hundred "Crows"
came from Scotch coast and left for mainland half an hour afterward.
Aug. 13th, about a thousand, at 11 a.m., flying high to south.

_Rathlin Island._--April 1st, forty at noon; 6th and 7th, a flock going
north; 16th, three. May 8th, three; 24th, Black Crows going north.
June 6th, flocks seen. Entries occur in August, October, November,
and December, of flocks of Rooks at intervals of a week or fortnight;
largest on November 11th and 12th. Direction of flight in nearly all
cases south.

_Innishtrahull._--April 1st, one "Black Crow" at 4 a.m.; foggy. May
26th, one.

_Lough Swilly._--June 23rd, 25th, and 30th, flocks all day.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--July 8th, fifteen Rooks.

_Killybegs._--In April and May, "Crows" to the number of about one
hundred visited daily. Probably belonged to rookery ten miles distant.

_Oyster Island, North._--April 27th, thirty at 4 p.m., passing S.E.

_Clare Island._--Feb. 20th, a few Crows flying N.W.; wind S.W., light,
foggy. Oct. 25th, Black Crows flying north; low.

_Arran Island, South._--April 6th, sixty common Crows. They remain.
Oct. 3rd, twenty Rooks going south; wind W.N.W.

_Valentia._--Sept. 2nd, four Black Crows. Nov. 12th, four.


Jackdaw.

_Valentia._--Oct. 12th, two. Nov. 26th, five.


Magpie.

_Arran Island, South._--Oct. 20th, five Magpies at noon. They remain
about here.

_Valentia._--Dec. 5th, two Magpies.


Swallow.

_Fastnet._--Nov. 6th, two, all day about rock.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 13th, flock flying N.W.; 14th, continuous
flocks flying N.W. Three killed at 10 p.m.; wind S.W., clear. Four
alighted on ship. Sept. 22nd, 23rd, and 30th, a great number passed,
going E. and N.E. Oct. 8th, 9th, and 10th, a few passed, four caught on
deck, at 2 a.m., two alighted on ship.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 20th, flocks of House Swallows, going E.S.E.; wind
N.W., light.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--May 8th, one alighted on ship; 17th and
18th, occasional Swallows, flying north. June 3rd and 6th, two or three
alighted on ship. Sept. 19th and 20th, odd Swallows, flying north, all
day. Oct. 8th, 20th, and 26th, a few passed.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 11th, first seen, then occasionally to 21st and
22nd, when they passed at intervals of fifteen minutes, all going west.
On May 8th and 13th, one or two passed; 14th, constantly passing,
going W. and N.W., two killed; 15th, 16th, and 17th, Swallows all day,
remaining on rock some hours, then flying W. A few passing daily to end
of month, especially on 22nd. During August and September one or two at
intervals about rock. Aug. 24th, a great number. From Oct. 5th to 11th,
many passed to east.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April 15th, several flocks; wind W.N.W.,
clear. May 13th, a flock; 14th, 15th, and 30th, Swallows. On Sept.
19th, 23rd, and 28th, one to six passed.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 22nd, 28th, and May 18th, Swallows
noted going N.W.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--June 25th, four passing north; wind light S.

_Rockabill._--April 16th, one, the first arrival, wind W., fresh; 18th,
several.

_Copeland Island._--Sept. 12th, several large flocks at noon; wind W.,
moderate, clear. They waited a few hours and went S.

_Rathlin Island._--April 30th, four at noon.

_Lough Swilly._--May 15th, a few Swallows, first seen.

_Arranmore._--April 21st, one at 7.30 a.m., passing over island. May
9th, one. June 16th, two.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--April 20th, one, wind N.; 23rd and 29th, May 4th
and 15th, one to three.

_Killybegs._--May 10th, 11th, and 12th, two to six. They build in
vicinity, and generally leave about the middle of June. Aug. 24th,
about thirty hovering round.

_Straw Island._--Sept. 12th, fifty going S.W., high; wind N., fresh.


Martin.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 8th, one Martin, the first seen; 12th,
several. They remain and build about station. Aug. 12th, Martins last
seen.


Cuckoo.

_Tuskar Rock._--Nov. 2nd, one Cuckoo killed striking.

_Rathlin Island._--May 3rd, three or four; heard for first time.

_Arranmore._--May 4th, one Cuckoo. May 12th, one.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 15th, Cuckoo first heard; wind N., light.

_Arran Island, South._--April 11th, "three Cuckoos," 4 p.m.; wind
E.S.E., cloudy.


Pigeon.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 31st, one.

_Rockabill._--Sept. 15th, ten going N. Oct. 30th, ten hovering about.
Dec. 3rd, two shot; 31st, Pigeons all day, one shot.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 28th, forty Pigeons; they are always on the
island. Nov. 16th, eighteen going N.; 25th, five, going S.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 8th, four Pigeons; wind S.W., light.

_Dunree Head._--Sept. 22nd, great flocks of Pigeons flying about all
day.

_Lough Swilly._--April 10th, flocks of Pigeons all day.

_Killybegs._--April 22nd, four Wild Pigeons build on cliffs near
Lighthouse. Aug. 26th, eight Wild Pigeons, 5 a.m.

_Clare Island._--Feb. 10th, some Wild Pigeons, flying E., in forenoon.
Oct. 15th, about four dozen flying generally over the island, also
during November and December about the fields on the island.

_Arran Island, South._--May 14th, fifty Wild Pigeons. Dec. 3rd, six;
10th, twenty; 28th, ten. They remain on island.

_Tearaght._--Oct. 21st, one Rock Pigeon; 27th, about a dozen. Jan.
15th, 1884, eighteen. Nov. 18th, five Rock Pigeons; 24th, about a
dozen, which still remain on island.

_Dursey Island._--June 7th, eight Wild Pigeons going E.; 17th, two.
Entries also on Aug. 24th, Sept. 10th, and Nov. 22nd.


Partridge.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 28th, six seen on rock in the morning; wind light
S.E., gloomy.

_Tearaght._--May 18th, one Partridge, at 4 p.m.


Grouse.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 1st, one Grouse, 4 p.m.; wind light S.W.,
moderate.

_Clare Island._--Grouse are not plentiful this year.


Golden Plover.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 9th, four "Grey" Plover, midnight; fog & mist.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Jan. 28th, large flocks; wind N.E. Feb. 15th,
large flock of "Plover" coming from N.; wind N.E. Dec. 17th, large
flocks all day; blue sky, frosty.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--June 16th, five "Plover" going N.E. Sept.
17th, some Plovers about ship at 8 a.m.; hazy.

_Copeland Island._--Oct. 10th, three "Grey" Plover killed striking;
wind N., light, drizzling rain.

_Innishtrahull._--Sept. 3rd, six; wind N., fresh. 18th, a pair shot.

_Tory Island._--Jan. 6th, 1884, seven resting on island.

_Arranmore._--Sept. 3rd, seventeen "Grey Plovers"; 18th, twenty.

_Killybegs._--April 16th, fifteen Golden Plovers, which only remained a
few days. A large flock of "Grey Plovers," which remained till the end
of April. Oct. 4th, about eighty Golden Plovers; remained up to this
date. Dec. 2nd, Golden and Grey Plover begin to come about the middle
of September, and are reinforced by flocks up to the end of November;
they usually leave about end of December.

_Arran Island South._--October 10th, twenty "Grey" Plover; wind W.,
going S.

_Dursey Island._--Nov. 12th, eight going W., 11 a.m.


Green Plover.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--March 2nd, two Lapwings around ship; 22nd,
thirty, flying N.W. May 7th, one killed, 9.30 p.m.; wind E.N.E., rain.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 9th, large flocks all day about shore; and on Oct.
21st and Jan. 11th, large flocks.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--March 21st, eight, flying N.W.

_Rockabill._--March 5th, one Green Plover struck, killed, 4 a.m.,
cloudy; wind fresh N.; 27th, Green Plover going N.; wind N., snow
showers; 28th, large flocks of Plover going N.; wind S.E., snow showers.

_Copeland Island._--April 4th, thirty, at 10 a.m.; 7th, a large flock
from mainland, going towards Scotch coast; 25th, continuous flocks
flying towards Scotch coast, all day; wind E., clear. Sept. 29th,
twenty alighted and remained on island; 30th, large flocks, some
hundreds in each, going N.E. and very high; wind strong, N., gloomy.

_Rathlin Island._--April 6th, six Green Plover, 4 p.m.; Oct. 30th, two
seen; Nov. 24th, one.

_Innishtrahull._--April 2nd, four at 5 p.m.; wind E.S.E., fresh, misty.
Sept. 20th, about twenty "Lapwing Plover"; wind E.S.E., strong; stayed
two days and then left, going S.

_Tory Island._--Sept. 15th, seven at noon, rested on island.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Sept. 21st, twelve alighted, then flew to N.E.

_Killybegs._--April 7th and 8th, four to eight; they hatch in vicinity.

_Slyne Head, North._--Dec. 14th, four Lapwings; wind N.E.

_Tearaght._--March 24th, one Lapwing, 8 a.m.; wind N.E., light; seemed
tired, and remained a few hours.


Turnstone.

_Tory Island._--Jan. 10th, 1884, flock of Turnstone, going S., 1 p.m.;
wind N.W., gale.


"Sand Larks."

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 14th, five Sand Larks; these were strange
birds. I have not seen them before on the coast.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Dec. 9th, one, the first seen for two years.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Jan. 19th, 19th, seven Sand


Larks.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April 15th, two flocks of Sand-birds.


_Rockabill._--Sand Larks noted in August and December. It is remarked
they remain "all the year."

_Innishtrahull._--Feb. 2nd, flock of "small sea-birds," 11 a.m. Sept.
11th, 12th, and 13th, "Sand Larks and some other small sea birds, name
unknown."

_Arran Island, North._--A few Sand Larks remain during the winter.

_Arran Island, South._--July 27th, eighty Sand Larks. Nov. 18th, a
flock on strand.

_Tearaght._--Dec. 13th, one Sand Lark; 15th, three; wind W., very
stormy. All a greyish colour, beaks about one inch long, and a little
red on the top towards feathers. Remained about a week.


Sea Pie.

_South Maidens._--May 10th, six Sea Pies; misty, rain.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 27th, three at noon.

_Arranmore._--May 18th, one Oystercatcher.

_Killybegs._--"Sepoys" to the number of thirty or forty from August to
end of September.

_Oyster Island, North._--Jan. 6th, 1884, six Oystercatchers on shore.

_Slyne Head, North._--The Sea Pie remains all the year.

_Arran Island, North._--A few "Sepoys" remain during the winter.

_Arran Island, South._--April 5th, thirty "Seapoys"; wind E., going S.

_Tearaght._--Two Sea Pies remained round island until about September.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 4th, four Sea Pies until 15th.


Redshank.

_Tuskar Rock._--May 16th, one seen.

_Skelligs._--One seen after a storm in November, very rare.


Greenshank.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 29th, about one dozen. Jan. 6th, a large flock from
sea into bay.


Heron.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 22nd, four flying high, and apparently fighting.

_Rathlin Island._--Oct. 6th, one at noon; wind light N.E.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 8th, one "Crane"; wind S.S.W., light.

_Tory Island._--Jan. 2nd, 1884, one Heron, at noon, at lake.

_Arranmore._--Aug. 16th, one "Crane" at 9 a.m.

_Killybegs._--Dec. 19th, two "Cranes" to be seen daily, in a swamp.

_Arran Island, South._--Oct. 25th, four "Cranes," 2 p.m.; wind W.N.W.,
going W.

_Tearaght._--Aug. 23rd, one Heron passing E.; wind N.W., light.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 2nd, two "Cranes," 9 a.m.; wind N., gale; stayed
about the rock for a fortnight.


Bittern.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 15th, one Bittern, 11 a.m.; wind N. This
bird I shot; it was the second ever seen here.


Whimbrel and Curlew.

_Galley Head._--May 15th, thirteen "May-birds or young Curlew" rested
a little while on headland and passed northwards. May 30th, fourteen
Curlew, going S.E.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--May 7th, one caught on ship; wind E.N.E.,
9.30 p.m.; 8th, flock of Curlew, 11 p.m., around ship; wind strong N.,
overcast. Oct. 28th, flock flying N.E., 10 p.m.

_Tuskar Rock._--March 23rd, one Curlew shot.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--May 18th, a flock of Curlew going N.E.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--May 17th, one Curlew heard, 9.30 p.m. July
30th, several Curlew around ship, 6.30 a.m.; weather foggy.

_Copeland Island._--May 10th, large flocks of Curlew appeared, and have
remained in vicinity to date of sending schedule in July.

_Rathlin Island._--April 5th, four Curlew going S., 7 a.m.; wind N.W.
May 10th, thirty Curlew, 3 p.m.; wind N. June 10th, flocks of Curlew,
6 a.m.; 20th, five seen; 24th, three. One or two dozen entered at
intervals during the winter months. They are here all the year.

_Innishtrahull._--Curlew in flocks of twenty to thirty during June and
July.

_Lough Swilly._--March 30th, thirteen Curlew; wind W., gale. May 15th,
a flock of "Whimbrel Curlew," 8 a.m.; wind W., light. 26th, twenty
"Whimbrel Curlew," 9 a.m.; wind N.W., gale.

_Tory Island._--"Curlews remain here during the year."

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 31st and April 1st, one; July 6th, fifteen.

_Killybegs._--April 1st, twenty-one Curlew, "May-birds"; 12th, a flock
of "May-birds"; 21st, a flock. These birds are unusually numerous, and
some shot were in very good condition. Aug. 31st, about one hundred
Curlew. Curlew (old birds) arrive about the beginning of August, and
remain up to the middle of December. Young Curlew, called "May-birds"
(Whimbrel), begin to arrive about the end of April in small flocks,
until they form one large flock, when they generally leave about the
beginning of June.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 3rd, several May-birds or young Curlew
arrived, and remained most part of the month.

_Blacksod._--Curlew are very numerous all the year round.

_Clare Island._--Feb. 1st, about two dozen Curlew flying S. at noon.
May 5th, flocks of "young Curlew" flying E.; wind E. to N. Oct. 10th,
a large flock flying low, and alighting. Curlew during November and
December, generally flying low through the fields.

_Arran Island, North._--Nov. 4th, twenty Curlew; wind N.E., moderate,
clear.

_Straw Island._--April 19th, sixty "young Curlew," 1 p.m.; wind N.W.,
fresh; remained a short time, and went towards shore.

_Arran Island, South._--April 4th, twenty Curlew, 6 a.m. May 13th,
thirty Curlew, 8 p.m.; wind W.S.W., hazy; three killed. July 29th,
fifty. Oct. 16th, thirty at "3 p.m.," three striking, one killed; wind
S.W., drizzling rain. Nov. 15th, four at 3 a.m.; wind S., two killed
striking, overcast and rainy.

_Tearaght._--Feb. 11th, one Curlew; wind S., strong; remained a
few days. Dec. 18th, one; wind N.E., clear. On several occasions
afterwards. Remained about a month.

_Valentia._--Oct. 30th, fifty; Nov. 6th, twenty.

_Dursey Island._--Two to ten Curlew at intervals from April 30th to May
23rd. Flight in various directions. Aug. 8th, large flock flying N.,
and a few at intervals to end of month.


Woodcock.

_Fastnet._--Oct. 29th, one. Nov. 1st, one; 2nd, four killed striking.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Dec. 17th, three.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 30th, one caught on deck, 2.30 a.m., the
first seen at this station. Nov. 2nd, one killed striking at 2 a.m.

_Rockabill._--Nov. 28th, one killed striking; wind S., fresh, cloudy
and overcast. 29th, another killed.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 15th, one killed, 11 p.m., drizzling rain; wind
light W.S.W.

_Arranmore._--Dec. 3rd, one Woodcock.

_Killybegs._--Sept. 21st, one Woodcock killed striking, 11.30 p.m.;
wind E.S.E., cloudy and misty. 22nd, another killed, 8 p.m.; wind E.

_Clare Island._--During November, a few Woodcock in mountainous parts
of island.

_Skelligs._--Nov. 4th, Woodcock seen.

_Dursey Island._--Nov. 4th, one Woodcock going N.; wind N.E.


Snipe.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 8th, twenty Snipe, six shot. Dec. 17th, five
Snipe.

_Tuskar Rock._--Oct. 29th, one Snipe killed striking; light mist.

_Copeland Island._--Snipe breed here. Oct. 10th, two killed striking;
wind N., light drizzling rain.

_South Maidens._--Oct. 19th, one Snipe killed striking; wind fresh
S.S.W., clear.

_Rathlin Island._--Aug. 9th, one Jack Snipe killed striking; wind light
S.E., cloudy.

_Arranmore._--Nov. 20th, one Snipe; 30th, one.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 18th, two Snipe on the shore.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Oct. 14th, one Jack Snipe, 1 p.m.; wind W., light.

_Clare Island._--Feb. 28th, a few Snipe flying W.; wind S.W. Oct. 20th,
Snipe on marshy land, flying in different directions.

_Tearaght._--Feb. 18th, one Snipe, 10 a.m.; wind light S.W., fine;
previously stormy. Nov. 20th, one; 23rd, three; left about a fortnight
afterwards.

_Skelligs._--Jan. 12th, 1884, Snipe seen.


Corn Crake.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 27th, came on rock in night. May 8th, another;
16th, one much exhausted; 29th, one.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--May 16th, one struck lantern, 11.10 p.m.,
killed; wind light, clear.

_Rockabill._--July 30th, one caught on rock.

_Rathlin Island._--May 13th, heard for first time.

_Oyster Island, North._--May 17th, Landrail first heard.

_Skelligs._--May 5th, one seen, very rare


Waterhen.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 8th, five Waterhen.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 8th, one alighted on ship, 6 a.m.; calm,
thick fog.


Coot.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 8th, twenty Coot (a marsh near).


Geese.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Feb. 10th, three Wild Geese, came from S. Oct.
15th, three going N.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 20th, eleven flying N. and very high.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 28th, six going E. in the morning; weather gloomy.

_Copeland Island._--April 12th, eight going from mainland towards
Scotch coast. Dec. 10th, eight Wild Geese rested on island, came from
N.; wind S.W., fresh, rain.

_South Maidens._--June 12th, twelve Wild Geese.

_Rathlin Island._--Oct. 23rd, two Wild Geese, 7 a.m.; wind strong N.W.

_Innishtrahull._--Jan. 24th, flock of thirty Barnacle; wind S.W.,
strong. March 12th, fifteen going N.; wind S.W., strong. 14th,
twenty-four Wild Geese; wind S.W., gale. 15th, six Barnacle; wind
strong W., squally. Oct. 13th, one Wild Goose; wind S., fresh. 23rd,
nine Barnacle; 24th to 28th, nine to twenty Barnacle. Dec. 14th, three
Wild Geese; 17th, seventeen Barnacle.

_Dunree Head._--Aug. 1st, one hundred Barnacle flying very high to the
N. Sept. 12th, about two hundred Wild Geese flying low to the N. Oct.
14th, several flocks of Barnacle going S.; wind N.W., strong. 24th,
twenty Wild Geese going S.

_Tory Island._--Oct. 7th, 8th, and 12th, flocks of Wild Geese, 4 to 6
a.m.; wind W. and S.W., going W. and S.

_Arranmore._--January, thirty-six Barnacle; these birds have remained
all the winter; have not done so for years before. Feb. 4th,
twenty-two. March 2nd, two flocks passing. Sept. 30th, one Barnacle;
wind N., fresh. Oct. 20th, one; 31st, a flock, and flying all night for
many nights, in great quantities, in the direction of Sligo. Far the
last two winters numerous flocks of Barnacle have remained on island.
On Nov. 7th, 24th, 29th, and Dec. 25th, flocks are entered.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Oct. 24th, thirty-six. Nov. 4th, twenty came from
N., and passed over island to S.E.: 12th, six; 16th, small flocks
coming from N., and passing S. all day. Dec. 7th, eleven on island
grazing. 11th, six ditto; two were shot.

_Killybegs._--Aug. 17th, two Wild Geese, rested and flew N. Sept. 2nd,
about forty at a great height, flying N.; 27th, thirteen seen. Oct.
30th, eight Wild Geese generally take a S. to S.W. course, beginning
about the end of September and continuing up to the end of December,
and usually travel high; but they sometimes stop to feed and rest.

_Oyster Island, North._--"During the winter months a considerable
number of Barnacle arrive, some of which remain, and others pass
further south, the time of their arrival and departure apparently
depending on the severity of the season or otherwise." Entries of small
flocks occur from Sept. 9th to Oct. 5th. Larger and more frequent
flocks on Oct. 8th, 13th, 15th, Nov. 22nd, 29th, 30th, and on Dec. 5th;
in almost every case the direction of flight is S. or S.E. On. Dec.
6th, 15th, and 17th, large flocks passed in the opposite direction. On
Dec. 22nd continuous flocks again passed S.E., and on Jan. 5th, 1884, a
small flock. The direction of flight was apparently independent of the
direction of the wind or state of the weather.

_Broadhaven._--Dec. 20th and 26th. Barnacle and Wild Geese. They
frequent the place in winter.

_Blackrock Mayo._--Nov. 21st, twenty Barnacle flying S.E.

_Clare Island._--Oct. 6th, about two dozen Wild Geese flying high to
S.W.; wind W., light.

_Slyne Head, North._--Nov. 12th, five to twelve Barnacle at intervals;
wind N.W., one shot. Are very common; arrive Nov. 1st and remain to
March 1st.

_Straw Island._--March 16th, twenty Wild Geese, passing N.; wind light
S.W. Oct. 29th, twenty-two, 5 p.m., going N., high, calm.


Swans.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 23rd, "A Black Swan shot by the rector on one
of the lakes on the island."


Wild Duck.

_Fastnet._--Nov. 3rd, flock flying to E. Jan. 3rd, flock flying E.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Nov. 8th, ten Wild Duck; two shot.

_Dungarvan._--Oct. 28th, large flock. Nov. 3rd, fifty. Dec. 23rd, four
"Shelldrakes."

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--Sept. 10th, 12th, and 15th, a few Wild Duck
flying high to S. Nov. 16th, a large flock flying N.E. Dec. 7th, 14th,
and 19th, two to seven at intervals.

_Tuskar Rock._--Nov. 14th, seven Wild Duck came from N.W. and flew
round rock.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Dec. 1st, a large flock going N. Feb. 6th,
1884, flock going N.E.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--May 13th, a flock passing E. to W., 7.30 a.m.
Oct. 6th, twelve at 10.45 p.m., flying high to N.W.; weather hazy. Nov.
29th, thirteen flying N.W.

_Copeland Island._--April 12th, thirty left Mew Island after remaining
all the winter; wind light E., clear. Oct. 16th, several flocks of Teal
and Duck on Mew Island; wind S.W., strong.

_South Maidens._--April 14th, twenty-four Ducks; hazy, with rain. Oct.
20th, twelve, 10 a.m., went towards Scotland; wind W.S.W., strong.

_Rathlin Island._--Nov. 6th, five at 8 a.m.; wind S. Dec. 6th, two
going E.; wind N.E.

_Innishtrahull._--Nov. 6th, one "Shelldrake," 2 p.m.; wind N., fresh.

_Dunree Head._--Nov. 7th, about one hundred Wild Duck flying high to S.
Dec. 22nd, about fifty swimming opposite lighthouse all day.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 23rd, Dec. 1st, 2nd, and Jan. 1st, one to three
going S. or W.

_Arranmore._--April 5th, two arrived to breed. June 18th, three
seen. On Nov. 3rd, 10th, 28th, and Dec. 13th, Wild Duck seen. One
"Shelldrake" on Nov. 18th and 26th.

_Killybegs._--"I saw, in December, 1882, some Teal, but none since."

_Oyster Island, North._--"During the winter months a considerable
number of Widgeon arrive; some remain, and others pass further south."
Dec. 24th, continuous flocks going S.E.

_Clare Island._--December. A few Wild Duck on a lake during this month.

_Straw Island._--Feb. 13th, thirty, 10 a.m., remained on rock a short
time, and went S. Oct. 28th, thirty going S.E.; wind light S.

_Arran Island, South._--Dec. 6th, twenty Wild Duck went S.; wind E.
30th, twenty went S., wind E.


Merganser.

_Dungarvan._--Dec. 5th, four coming from S.E.


Great Northern Diver.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Jan. 20th, six passing S.W.

_Dungarvan._--Jan. 9th, two feeding near station.

_Tory Island._--Sept. 22nd, two "Speckled Diver," 8 a.m., going S.E.

_Arranmore._--April 7th, a Great Northern Diver shot on rock.

_Killybegs._--The Northern Diver visits us in the autumn and leaves
early. I have never seen more than three together.

_Clare Island._--During December a few of the Great Northern Diver.


Guillemot.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--March 31st, ten, and April 1st, thirty alighted on
rock at shore.

_Clare Island._--A large number this year.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 20th, Guillemot first observed round island on the
water. Feb. 19th, about fifty came on rock for first time; left about
Aug. 1st.

_Skelligs._--Nov. 20th and Dec. 11th, a few Guillemots fishing in
shelter of rock; wind N.W. to W., strong gale.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--June 15th and 19th, "Murs" in flocks,
flying in different directions. Dec. 10th, large flocks of "Murs"; also
on 23rd and 26th; flocks also on 29th, 30th, Jan. 8th and 15th.


Puffin.

_Galley Head._--Feb. 12th, twenty going W.; 16th, nine ditto. April
29th, continuous flocks, from seventy to one hundred in each, going W.
From May 6th to 13th, 18th to 27th, and June 16th to 25th, continuous
flocks, and occasional flocks to July 16th; all going W.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Jan. 23rd, continuous flocks, 9 a.m. to 3 p.m.;
wind fresh S. Large numbers going S. on Feb. 7th, 20th, 22nd, and March
17th; continuous flocks on March 5th. From Oct. 7th to 10th, some
hundreds going S.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--April 21st, continuous flocks flying S.W.;
26th, flocks. Nov. 16th, flocks, 9 to 11 a.m.; 21st, 23rd, Dec. 9th and
14th, flocks; passing continuously on Nov. 29th and Dec. 19th; wind W.
to S.W.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 6th, a great number.

_Tuskar Rock._--From June 13th to 18th, "Puffins and Sea-parrots"
alighted in large flocks. Aug. 20th to 22nd, Puffins in hundreds on
rock.

_Rathlin Island._--April 12th, "Parrots, Bridle Nebs," &c., begin to
arrive; 22nd, arrived in full force and took possession of the cliffs.
The Sea-parrots hatching on the cliffs are not at all as numerous as
last year.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 8th, "three Sea-parrots and twenty Puffins."
January, 1884, a few "Puffins and Sea-parrots through the month."

_Lough Swilly._--April 19th, several flocks of Puffins. June 1st,
Puffins passing and repassing.

_Arranmore._--March 12th, Puffins passing.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--May 14th, Puffins passing S. In June, about the
island.

_Killybegs._--April 22nd, Puffins arriving in large numbers about this
date, coming early each morning and leaving in the evening, flying W.
Aug. 14th, Puffins leaving, going W. They arrive about the month of
July, and are to be seen in thousands until October.

_Oyster Island, North._--April 19th, several during day. May 29th,
small flocks.

_Black Rock, Mayo._--Sept. 9th, Puffins on water round the rock; a few
nearly every day during September and October.

_Clare Island._--March 15th, about fifty; wind N.N.E. Generally arrive
latter part of March, and leave towards the end of August. A large
number this year.

_Straw Island._--March 17th, forty Puffins remained two days; wind S.,
hazy fog. April 9th, twenty "Sea-parrots," wind S.W., strong. Aug.
20th, forty-four going S. They arrive early in spring and generally
leave in September, and breed on the middle island of Arran.

_Tearaght._--"April 1st, the Sea-parrots arrived; not so plentiful as
in previous years. Aug. 20th, only about half a dozen Sea-parrots on
the island; left about this date. When they arrive on April 1st they
remain perhaps a week on the water before they come on the island;
then they mostly rise in one body, and hover some time before they
rest. They all go down to the water again when getting dark, except
when breeding; those hatching remain. As a rule there is a rush to the
island every day about 4 p.m. Sometimes there are two rushes in the
day. Their fighting propensities are often put into practice, and when
so engaged they can readily be captured; their fight only ends when
they have reached the sea, after having tumbled sometimes all the way
from the highest pinnacle of the island."

_Skelligs._--Nov, 20th, a few Puffins fishing in shelter of rock; wind
N.W., gale.


Razorbill.

_Clare Island._--April 30th, two to four dozen Razorbills at 9 a.m.

_Tearaght._--March 19th, great numbers of Razorbills first observed;
20th, first rested on rock. Left about Aug. 10th.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 16th, large flocks flying S.S.W.; wind S.E. Nov.
20th, flocks fishing in shelter of rock, mostly young birds; wind N.W.,
strong gale. Dec. 11th, Razorbills fishing in shelter; wind W., strong
gale.


Cormorant.

_Tuskar Rock._--April 27th, the Cormorants have totally deserted the
rock.

_Rockabill._--Oct. 30th, Cormorants all day; they leave the rock in
April, and are back this month.

_Rathlin Island._--June 22nd, five seen. Aug. 17th, three. Dec. 4th,
5th, and 9th, one to six.

_Tory Island._--Dec. 11th, six on rock at 9 a.m.

_Killybegs._--May 2nd, Cormorants to the number of about forty
observed. Aug. 26th, about seventeen. The greater number leave about
the end of December, but some remain all the winter.

_Blackrock, Mayo._--Sept. 30th, five flying S.E. A few nearly every day
during September and October.

_Clare Island._--Cormorants are seen all the year round.

_Slyne Head, North._--The Cormorant leaves to breed elsewhere.


_Straw Island._--Feb. 22nd, Cormorants at all hours. Remain during the
year, generally fishing singly. Sept. 24th, ten.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 11th, eleven Cormorants seen at intervals
along the shore.

_Valentia._--Sept. 20th, four. Nov. 16th, two; 22nd, five. Dec. 5th,
eight; also on 21st and 24th.

_Skelligs._--One or two entered on Sept. 20th, Oct. 12th, and during
December.

_Dursey Island._--A few noted on April 11th and July 13th, and one to
four seen at intervals from Sept. 27th to Dec. 18th.


Gannet.

_Galley Head._--Five to twelve going W. on Jan. 29th, Feb. 7th, April
11th, May 14th, 18th to 27th; continuous flocks of Gannets going W. on
March 19th, 20th, 27th, 28th, June 16th to 25th; and in less numbers
to date of sending schedule, July 16th. No entry of Gannets going E.
at this station except on April 20th. One or two grey or young Gannets
seen on May 14th and June 16th.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Jan. 20th to 23rd, continuous flocks passing S.W.
Large flocks on Feb. 7th, 22nd, and March 17th. On Oct, 5th and 6th,
some hundreds going S. Nov. 5th, forty-five going E.; 20th, Gannets.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--April 29th, four flying W. June 6th, two
Gannets, and at intervals to end of month. Oct. 15th, four flying E.;
and from 31st to Dec. 1st, one to five passing at intervals.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--April 27th, May 18th, 20th, and 26th,
occasional Gannets flying W. June 27th, Gannets in twos and threes.
Oct. 23rd, occasional Gannets, and a few at intervals until January.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--March 10th, a flock; 26th, seven. During
April flocks at intervals, especially towards end of month. In May two
to seven passing at intervals in various directions. During June, July,
August and September a few Gannets seen frequently. In October less
common.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--Gannets noted at intervals during April,
May, and June; May 1st and 12th, flocks continuous. Flight generally
N.E. September, flocks at intervals.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Three entries of Gannets in May, one in June,
and one in July; direction of flight different in each case. Oct. 3rd,
six flying S.W. Nov. 23rd, flocks from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. going to S.W.

_Copeland Island._--Gannets remain about the island all the year. In
August this year large numbers fishing in vicinity.

_South Maidens._--Two entries of Gannets in April. Oct. 20th, two seen.

_Rathlin Island._--Fourteen entries occur in schedule between March
28th and June 17th; in eleven the direction of flight was entered, and
in all it was towards the west, and seemed independent of the weather.
On April 13th, 19th, 21st, May 4th, 7th, 12th, 13th, 23rd, and June 2nd
the flocks were passing all day. During August four entries occur, but
direction of flight is not given. One entry in October.

_Innishtrahull._--Jan. 8th, four Gannets; wind strong S.W.

_Lough Swilly._--May 1st, 20th, and July 30th, a few noted.

_Tory Island._--Nov. 13th, two going E.; noon.

_Arranmore._--March 9th and 26th, four to six passing all day. Oct.
14th, twelve.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--April 6th and 18th, a few. May 14th and 18th,
continuous flock all day going S. In June Gannets around island at
intervals. Sept. 9th, 19th, a few. Oct. 5th and 6th, hundreds; most
left about Oct. 17th.

_Killybegs._--April 9th, two; 12th, about thirty, usually in pairs.
Aug. 14th, Gannets leaving. Gannets begin to arrive in June, sometimes
earlier, and mostly leave in September; their movements are very
uncertain.

_Oyster Island, North._--Gannets noted at intervals from April 5th to
18th.

_Blackrock, Mayo._--To be seen nearly every day during September and
October.

_Slyne Head, North._--Aug. 1st, numbers of young Gannets are to be
seen. Gannets entered on Aug. 10th, 17th, very common, and flocks at
intervals on Nov. 17th; and thirty on Nov. 25th.

_Straw Island._--Feb. 10th, fifteen Gannets seen at 2 p.m., strong
breeze, W., going S. Gannets entered on Aug. 8th, Sept. 3rd, and Oct.
11th, generally hovering about. It generally makes its appearance with
various kinds of fish, mackerel, pilchards, &c.

_Arran Island, South._--Nov. 29th, two at noon; remained three days.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 20th, several fishing. Nov. 20th, saw no Gannets
since Oct. 29th.

_Dursey Island._--Seven to thirty noted at intervals during April and
on May 11th and 29th; flight generally W. or N.W. A few noted Aug.
11th; Sept. 6th, large flocks all day going S.; and a few on Sept. 28th.


Tern.

_Copeland Island._--The Terns appear on Mew Island to breed on May 15th
and 16th. They come in the night, at first in small numbers, increasing
each night for ten or twelve nights, when many hundreds are to be seen.
Sept. 19th, some hundreds of Terns left Mew Island on this date; wind
S.E., light misty rain. Heard leaving during night.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Terns arrived at usual time; they breed on island
outside lighthouse.

_Oyster Island, North._--April 8th, five Terns passing S.; 12th,
several during day.

_Slyne Head, North._--May 20th, the Tern arrives for breeding, and
continues until about Aug. 2nd.


Gulls.

_Galley Head._--June 1st to 15th, large flocks of Gulls after fry.

_Old Head, Kinsale._--Oct. 7th to 10th, some hundreds going S. Nov.
20th, Grey Gulls.

Coningbeg Light-skip.--April 22nd, flocks of Grey Gulls; 26th, ditto.
June 13th, ditto. Nov. 21st, flocks of small Gulls.

_Dungarvan._--Nov. 6th, a great number.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--July 3rd and 9th, Sea Gulls in flocks,
flying E. after fry. During November and part of December large flocks
apparently after small fish, working east and west with the tides.

_Tuskar Rock._--From June 13th to 18th, Gulls alighted in large flocks.

_Arklow North Light-ship._--April 1st, continuous flocks of Grey Gulls
going N.E.

_Kish Bank Light-ship._--Flocks of Grey Gulls noted on May 8th, 25th,
and June 15th. Oct. 16th, flock of Grey Gulls hovering about all day.
Nov. 27th, a flock all day after fry.

_Rockabill._--Gulls come in April and leave at the end of September.

_Copeland Island._--Herring Gulls remain about the island all the year.
In August a large number of Grey and Royal Gulls fishing in vicinity.

_Rathlin Island._--Flocks of Gulls on March 29th, May 1st, 18th, 22nd,
June 8th, 20th, and 27th; direction of flight not given. Flocks during
August of twenty to thirty Royal Gulls at intervals. Two or three
thousand Kittiwakes on 11th and 30th. Entries of Gulls occur twice in
November, and large flocks going S. on Dec. 17th, 21st, and 30th.

_Innishtrahull._--Dec. 25th, two Royal Gulls.

_Lough Swilly._--April 1st, a few; 6th, several; 19th, in great
numbers. May 1st, ditto. May 20th and June 1st, Gulls. July 27th, very
numerous all day.

_Tory Island._--Sept. 5th, a flock of "Common Gulls" flying W. Nov.
15th, three Black-backed Gulls at 8 a.m., going E.; 28th, a flock of
Gulls.

_Arranmore._--March 12th, Gulls passing.

_Rathlin O'Birne._--Flocks of fifty to one hundred on April 10th, 12th,
28th, and May 8th. In June, Gulls about island. Flocks of Gulls from
one hundred to thousands on Aug. 31st, Sept. 19th, 20th, 30th, Oct.
5th, and 6th. The greater number left on Oct. 17th. On Nov. 4th, 22nd,
and Dec. 7th, eighty to one hundred all day.

_Killybegs._--Gulls of the grey species to the number of about two
hundred remained here during spring, coming in the morning and
departing in the evening to the cliffs around Slieve League. Thousands
of Kittiwakes arrived about beginning of May, and still (August)
remain. Aug. 14th, several hundreds leaving. Kittiwakes and Grey Gulls
usually arrive in large numbers about June or July, and leave towards
the end of September; but a few, notably the large grey kind, remain
all the month.

_Oyster Island, North._--Gulls noted on April 12th, 18th, 22nd, May
24th, and 29th.

_Broadhaven._--Oct. 10th, three dozen Kittiwakes; 24th, four dozen
Black-headed Gulls.

_Blackrock, Mayo._--Sept. 9th, flocks of small Gulls on water. Sept.
22nd and Jan. 5th, 1884, two Royal Gulls. Large and small Gulls nearly
every day during September and October.

_Clare Island._--March 15th, about a dozen small Sea Gulls during
day. A large number of Gulls of different species in the cliffs near
lighthouses this year. Kittiwakes are here all the year.

_Slyne Head, North._--Gulls noted on Aug. 20th and Nov. 17th.

_Arran Island, North._--Nov. 14th, ten; wind fresh W.S.W.

_Straw Island._--Feb. 13th, the Grey and the Royal Gull continually
in vicinity of lighthouse. The Grey Gulls remain during year. Gulls
entered Aug. 13th, Sept. 1st, and Oct. 5th (Royal). Flight generally
S.W.

_Arran Island, South._--July 25th, fifty Sea Gulls. Nov. 27th, Sea
Gulls about shore to be seen at all times.

_Tearaght._--Feb. 6th, Kittiwakes first came on rock about this
time; left about Sept. 1st. "They commence to build about May 1st.
On May 24th only two eggs were found among hundreds of nests. The
nest-building is carried on by some after hatching has commenced with
others. A difficult business this nest-making seems to be, as the mud
or clay which makes up the foundation has to be carried from some soft
bank. Hundreds of them are employed about six weeks at this operation,
some going with the very small portion of mud they are able to take in
their beaks, others coming for more, the bank covered over with more in
the act of digging out. The whole is a continuous busy scene."

_Valentia._--Royal Gulls, one to four, Sept. 10th, 30th, Oct. 28th, and
Nov. 10th.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 16th, observed large flocks of Kittiwakes flying
S.S.W.; wind S.E. Grey Gulls noticed from September to January, and
two to four Black-backed Gulls occasionally. Kittiwakes fishing in
shelter of rock, Nov. 20th and Dec. 11th; wind strong gale, N.W. and W.

_Dursey Island._--Large flock of Gulls noted on April 7th, 25th, 27th,
and May 5th. A few on May 27th, and at intervals to July. Large flocks
on Aug. 25th and Sept. 18th, going W. Four Royal Gulls on Dec. 22nd.


Skua Gull.

_Galley Head._--Jan. 20th, flocks of five to seven Skua Gulls going W.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 28th, two Skuas chasing Gulls.

_Tuskar Rock._--June 7th, flocks alighted on rock four mornings in
succession at same hour. Aug. 20th to 22nd, Skua Gulls in hundreds.

_Lough Swilly._--June 22nd, one "Boatswain Skua Gull."

_Valentia._--Nov. 22nd, four Skua Gulls.


Manx Shearwater.

_Barrels Rock Light-ship._--July 6th, "Mackerel Cocks" flying in
different directions.

_Rathlin Island._--April 12th, Shearwater began to arrive; 22nd, more
arrived.

_Tearaght._--Jan. 30th, "Mackerel Cock" in great numbers diving round
rock; observed a fortnight previous to this date. Feb. 25th, "Mackerel
Cock" (believed to be) left, always diving, and did not come on rock.
April 5th, note of the Shearwater first heard. Nov. 21st, "Mackerel
Cock" diving about the rock pretty plentifully. Not certain about this
bird. The Manx Shearwater left about Aug. 1st. It was heard frequently
during the summer, and always on very dark calm nights. The sounds,
being frequent and distinct, were, very impressive. When the moon would
rise, or it would clear, a single note was not to be heard.


Stormy Petrel.

_Coningbeg Light-ship._--Oct. 9th, five Mother Carey's Chickens caught
on deck, 5 a.m.; wind light, hazy. Oct. 15th, two Stormy Petrels about
ship; 28th, two caught on deck, 10.30 p.m.

_Arklow South Light-ship._--April '24th, one; wind light E.

_Tearaght._--Stormy Petrel very plentiful this year. They are not
much observed until July, from which time they continue breeding
until September. They make a noise which is a continuous chain of
articulations, and might be heard on a calm night a distance of 300
feet; this noise is kept up by those in the holes as well as those on
the wing.

_Skelligs._--Sept. 4th, two struck, 10.30 p.m., not killed; did not
notice any after this date. They breed here.


Birds not Identified.

_Rockabill._--"March 6th, large bird, name unknown, killed striking, at
3 a.m.; wind N., fresh, cloudy. Had long bill, and long black legs."

_Killybegs._--April 8th, "three strange birds, name unknown. White
fan-shaped tail, tipped with black; wings white, tipped with black;
white ring round neck; size of Sparrow; came from seaward, and remained
several days."

_Tearaght._--May 20th, "one bird, not known, about the size of a
Lapwing; colour of a Grey Plover, land-bred, fan-tail, tips of feathers
of tail white, chased by Crows."

_Tearaght._--Oct. 28th, "small bird, size of a Linnet; shoulders red or
copper-colour; breast and belly grey, also round neck; head tufted. It
remained about a week."

_Tearaght._--Nov. 18th, "a bird about the size of a Linnet came on
island; above eyes a white curved streak; eyes and round eyes black;
under head, round breast, a white ring, thence down belly, wings, and
back of a reddish or copper-colour; some white feathers in wing; top
of head black, and tail appears narrow and black. Two of these, one
readily distinguished from the other."



WEST, NEWMAN AND CO., PRINTERS, 54, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON, E.C.


       *       *       *       *       *


Transcriber Note

Minor typos corrected. In previous editions, one locality was listed as
"Farne". In this edition, there is one reference to Farne Islands (p. 54)
all of the other locations are listed as "Farn" and left as is. Due to
space limitations, the table on page 81 was rotated 90°.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPORT ON THE MIGRATION OF BIRDS IN THE SPRING AND AUTUMN OF 1883. FIFTH REPORT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


