The Project Gutenberg eBook of An essay on diseases incidental to literary and sedentary persons
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An essay on diseases incidental to literary and sedentary persons
        With proper rules for preventing their fatal consequences. And instructions for their cure

Author: S. A. D. Tissot


        
Release date: July 10, 2024 [eBook #74001]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Edward and Charles Dilly, 1768

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/74001

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY ON DISEASES INCIDENTAL TO LITERARY AND SEDENTARY PERSONS ***






                                    AN
                                  ESSAY
                                    ON
                                 DISEASES
                              INCIDENTAL TO
                    Literary _and_ Sedentary Persons.
                                   WITH
                 PROPER RULES for preventing their fatal
                              Consequences.
                                   AND
                       INSTRUCTIONS for their CURE.

                          By S. A. TISSOT, M. D.
                      Professor of PHYSICK at BERNE.

                    Now first translated into ENGLISH.

                                 LONDON:
           Printed for EDWᵈ. and CHARLES DILLY, in the Poultry.
                               MDCCLXVIII.




[Illustration]




TO

The CONSULS, QUÆSTORS, TRIBUNES, and other illustrious and great Men of
the senatorial Order at _Berne_.


I am indebted to you for many great obligations, most illustrious and
great men; and lately you have done me the honour to confer a most noble
and unexpected favour upon me. It is but just that I should by words
thank those to whom I am incapable of making any other return; and such a
testimony of gratitude I will shew them as long as I live. It is proper
that, being publickly graced by your favours, I should make a public
acknowledgment, and give some pledge of my gratitude, however mean and
inadequate. Receive therefore, most illustrious and excellent men,
and deign to receive favourably, this first though feeble proof of my
diligence in my new office. May the Almighty enable me to promote the
public interest of the academy by more considerable and more valuable
productions, and may the hopes which you have conceived of me, venerable
fathers of your country, and the hopes which the people have conceived
concerning this new professorship, be fulfilled to general satisfaction.
May the propitious Deity likewise favour all your public and private
undertakings, and shower all his choicest blessings both upon you and
yours, and the whole commonwealth. And cease not, reverend fathers, to
make happy, by your constant benevolence and favour, a man entirely
devoted to the service of your excellencies.

                                                             S. A. TISSOT.

_Lausanne, April 29, 1766._




Advertisement to the Reader.


_The occasion of this discourse, and the choice of the materials, will
sufficiently appear from the discourse itself: therefore, courteous
reader, I shall not trespass upon thy patience by a long preface._

_I have long since read many treatises and dissertations concerning the
health of the studious; but of all the authors, who have treated this
subject, the only one who has acquitted himself to my satisfaction is
BERNARD RAMAZINI: for I have not yet had an opportunity of reading the
work of the celebrated PUJATUS, a man who in other respects has deserved
highly of the medicinal science; but whose treatise upon this subject
is, I find, neither praised by the journals nor by his friends. Nor is
the work of RAMAZINI compleat; since he has left more topicks untouched
than he has elucidated. I have therefore undertaken an important, an
agreeable, and even a new subject; and I hope I shall not appear unequal
to it; but it will be sufficient to have pointed out the road at a
distance to learned travellers; they will soon be able of themselves to
shew the unknown paths; which is my earnest wish and desire. In this
treatise there will occur many passages transcribed verbatim from CELSUS,
GAUBIUS, and other eminent men, and that even without distinguishing them
by quotation. This plagiarism will, I hope, be excused, because I looked
upon it as a sort of profanation to alter their words, as they were
extreamly eloquent, and admirably adapted to my purpose: besides, it was
improper to disgust the reader by too great a number of quotations._




[Illustration]




ON THE

DISEASES

OF

Literary _and_ Sedentary Persons.


When I consider with myself how many and how great men have formerly
ascended this chair, with how general an applause they apply’d to the
education of youth, and how every branch of erudition has been cultivated
to such advantage by the present set of teachers, into whose learned
order I am this day admitted by the great favour and indulgence of our
senate; whilst I at the same time reflect how much this new situation
differs from my former manner of living, in which as I had willingly
pass’d a considerable part of my life, I had determin’d to continue to
my old age; when I reflect upon all these circumstances, a tremor seizes
my limbs, and my voice falters. But because from the very foundation of
this respectable academy, custom, which governs all things, and your
expectation requires it of me, embolden’d by your kindness, I will make
trial of my abilities.

Being a new member, and ascending a new chair, I propos’d to speak of the
connexion between physic and other academical studies, and it was my
design to explain what it borrows from them, and what it contributes to
them in its turn.

It would be a pleasure to me, reverend pastors of the church, and
illustrious professors of divinity, to declare aloud how much physick
is indebted to religion; I would gladly vindicate the principles of
physicians from the imputations of ancient calumny, and prove that
religion is strongly supported by a science, which, being totally
conversant in the contemplation of an admirable creature, demonstrates
from the wonderful mechanism of a man in health, and the surprising cures
of the sick, the existence and great wisdom of the Supreme Artificer, and
that even to the most obstinate. Do men forget the Deity? Physicians
stand forth, and theology is entirely reviv’d; for who have spoken more
truth, or in a sublimer stile concerning God, than they? There would be
no end, were I to cite them all; but I must not pass over in silence
HIPPOCRATES, the first who ever asserted that fate produc’d nothing, but
that all those events, which we call fortuitous, are regulated by the
will of God: the next to him is GALEN, who diffusively proves, that the
existence of God is demonstrated by the position of the thumb alone;
and calls his treatise concerning the use of the parts, a monument to
the glory of the Deity: to him must be added POLYCHRESTUS, to whom the
illustrious sir-name of _Lover of God_ was given, on account of his
great piety: BOYLE, who wrote excellent works himself, and founded an
admirable institution for the promotion of religion, which he nobly
endow’d; his friend SYDENHAM; the immortal LOCK; HOFFMAN, who carried
his piety so far, that he was not entirely free from superstition; the
admirable TRALLES; and my dear and worthy friend HALLER, who in an
excellent treatise has asserted the utility of religion in a manly stile,
as usual, and exerts himself to the utmost to promote its cause.

Physicians indeed laugh at the idle tales of old women, at the
extravagancies of the vulgar, and thereby incur the censure of weak and
superstitious people; they deride the inventions of imagination; and
whilst every divine lays down his own opinion as the rule of truth,
physicians make a jest of the phantoms which these set up for religion,
and refuse to embrace a cloud for a Juno: thence all these clamours,
these accusations, these reproaches, and these calumnies. But if some of
our society have in fact been led astray by error, which I am sorry to
say cannot be denied, the severe censure of their colleagues has soon
convinced the public how much they disapprov’d of their principles.

It would be a pleasure to me, most learned professor of morality, whom to
address by the tender name of father-in-law is my greatest happiness; it
would be a pleasure to me, I say, to treat to the best of my abilities of
the connexion between the knowledge of morals and of health; how near the
relation is between them, how exact the concatenation in every respect.
This is certainly both an agreeable and useful undertaking: nor is it
altogether new; for HIPPOCRATES has in his whole treatise concerning
diet, done his utmost to prove that souls are the same in all men, and
that the various degrees of wisdom and folly proceed from the different
temperament of their bodies; and GALEN, who has admirably demonstrated
the power of the body over the mind and the motions of the will, desired
the teachers of philosophy, sixteen ages ago, to send all persons of bad
morals to him to be cur’d[1].

Should I be ever so full, most learned professor of jurisprudence, I
could not entirely display the connexion between us; for whether a
legislator regulates a commonwealth, or whether a judge upon the bench
weighs questions of civil law, or criminal and ecclesiastical causes, in
the ballance of Themis, there occur cases, and those not a few, in which
he cannot do without the assistance of our art.

It would be necessary to lay open the greatest part of natural knowledge,
most profound professor of philosophy, were I to treat of all that it has
in common with physick; for you well know that both the cure of diseases,
and the contemplation of the nature of things, had their beginnings from
the same authors. We are therefore inform’d that many of the professors
of natural philosophy were well skilled in physick, and that the most
illustrious of these were PYTHAGORAS, EMPEDOCLES, and DEMOCRITUS.
HIPPOCRATES was the first who separated these studies; but he did not
separate them in such a manner as to pull them asunder entirely, but so
as to split that comprehensive science into several more minute members,
that many might cultivate divided, what one could not learn entire; but
that neither should desert what nature made inseparable.

That part of this science, which considers body merely as body, has
retain’d the name of natural philosophy: others went by various names,
according to the different sorts of bodies of which they treated. The
human body is the object of physick, which without natural philosophy is
lame; for he is but a dunce in the art of healing, who is not acquainted
with the forces of bodies, and the laws of motion: nor do professors of
physick care to undertake the education of those, who are ignorant of
natural philosophy. But if physick is greatly indebted to this science,
it can in some respects return the favour, and physicians have return’d
it in many instances: for GILBERT, who first satisfactorily explain’d
the phænomena of electricity, was a physician, as was likewise BOYLE,
who promoted natural knowledge more than any other philosopher; and
BOERHAAVE, whose experiments upon the elements have given a new face to
this science; and to pass over many others in silence, the illustrious
MUSCHEMBROEK, who is universally allow’d to surpass all others in this
article.

And there is some connexion, though perhaps not so close, between your
studies and physick, illustrious professors of history and languages;
for what physician would not be asham’d to be ignorant of history and
the humanities? Who would not be desirous of consulting the Arabian
physicians in the originals, as none of them has hitherto been faithfully
translated? Are there not likewise certain parts of history, which
physick alone can throw proper lights upon? Is not CELSUS a physician,
whose works all that are desirous of speaking Latin in perfection, study
night and day? PLINY, in whom we meet not merely with helps for acquiring
the Latin language, but with the purest Latinity, though he did not
practise physic, understood it perfectly, and is entirely taken up in
explaining it. ARETEUS, whom we respect as a master of the healing art,
is conspicuous for the elegance of his Greek. GALEN has an eloquence
peculiar to himself. So has ALEXANDER. And those who cultivate the Arabic
language, boast that it is no where to be found in greater purity than in
the writings of physicians.

It appear’d to me at first sight, that on so copious a subject it would
be easy to make an oration; but upon maturer deliberation I began to
think quite otherwise; and so, having laid down a burthen too heavy
for my shoulders, and left it to more sublime geniuses, I kept to my
practice, _my labour is here engaged, and not my eloquence_; and, having
resigned the hopes of declaiming like an able orator, or soothing your
ears with the allurement of words, I have chosen this subject, as capable
of pleasing you by its own force; and as it is sufficient barely to lay
it before you, it requires no ornaments:

    _De tauris dicit arator, navita de ventis._
    _Quod medicorum est promittunt medici._

    _The plowman talks of oxen, the sailor of the wind._
    _Physicians offer what belongs to their profession._

And addressing myself to learned men as a physician, I shall treat of the
health of studious men; and here again I must request your indulgence:

    _Dira per incautum serpunt contagia vulgus._

    _A dire contagion through the vulgar spreads._

But whilst I was hurried about to attend a crowd of patients, I had
no leisure to polish my work; therefore I have without method thrown
together my thoughts and observations on this useful topic.

It is an old complaint, that study, though essentially necessary to the
mind, is hurtful to the body; and CELSUS has intimated the necessity
of a remedy. Those that are of weak constitutions, says he, as most
studious men are, should take greater care than others, that what is
impaired by application to their studies may be repair’d by attention to
their constitutions. And PLUTARCH, an admirable judge of what is right
and becoming, declares it to be a shame, that the learned should spend
days and nights in useless investigations, and at the same time neglect
the art of preserving their health; being, doubtless, ignorant that the
healing science was formerly look’d upon as a part of wisdom, and that
those chiefly requir’d medical assistance, who have impair’d their bodily
strength by anxious thought and watchfulness.

There are two principal sources, from whence all the sufferings of the
studious flow; the constant exercise and application of the mind, and the
continual rest of the body; for they are as indolent in body, as they
are busy and active in mind. By enumerating the ills, that arise from
both causes, a dreadful crop of diseases will be display’d.

Let metaphysicians bewilder themselves in inquiries, how the mind
governs the body, and is govern’d by the latter in its turn; physicians,
descending to considerations of less importance, but of greater
certainty, perhaps, and little sollicitous about the causes of this
mutual government, and but confining their inquiries to phænomena, know
by experience, that certain emotions of the mind necessarily arise from
certain conditions of the body, and that by particular emotions in the
mind particular changes are unavoidably produc’d in the body, and that
whilst the mind thinks, some part of the brain is stretch’d. We make no
other inquiry; it would be of no use to know any thing farther.

So close is the connexion between mind and body, that we cannot well
conceive the operations of the one independent of some correspondence
with the other. For as the senses are incapable of conveying the
materials of thought to the soul, without the motion both of their
own fibres and those of the brain, so, whilst the mind revolves these
cogitations, the organs of the brain are more or less stimulated to
act, stretch’d, and have oscillatory motions excited in them. The mind
agitates the machine; and these are the labours of the medullary part,
which, being so tender, does not suffer the less by these motions;
and every man easily feels that in himself, which the strongest arms
experience after the most violent exercise.

For which of you, that has been addicted to a studious life, has not
often found, after intense thought, that the innermost part of the brain
has been affected by a troublesome heat, and intense pain, such as the
muscles feel when fatigu’d with long labour? Nor does the medullary part
of the brain suffer alone, but the very eyes themselves can perceive the
force of the thinking soul, extended beyond the brain: for whilst we look
upon a man that meditates seriously, all the muscles of his face appear
stretched, nay sometimes convuls’d. Nor does the brain, the medulla of
which is the source of the nerves, suffer alone, but they themselves
are hurt; and PLATO has admirably shewn, in the masculine style in which
he so greatly excell’d, how much the exercise of the mind prejudices the
body. “Quando anima, inquit, corpore admodum potentior est, exultatque
in eo atque effertur, totum ipsum intrinsecus quatiens languoribus
implet. Quando etiam ad dicendum, investigandumque, collectis in unum
viribus, vehementer incumbit, liquefacit prorsus corpus, & labefactat;
denique cum ad dicendum, differendumque privatim & publice ambitiosa
quadam concertatione contendit, inflammat corpus atque resolvit. Tam
arcta enim lege consortii, sic RAMAZZINI, fœderantur anima & corpus
ut omnia tam bona quam mala unius in alterum vicissim corrivent, ac
veluti, ex corporis nimia exercitatione, anima ad mentis functiones
languescit, ac torpet, sic ob nimiam animæ contentionem, circa sapientiæ
studium, corpus marcescat necesse est, absumptis nempe spiritibus,
communi scilicet instrumento ad materiales & spirituales operationes
rite obeundas.” “As the mind, says he, is far more powerful than the
body, and exults and is elate therein, it affects it inwardly, and fills
it entirely with languor; and when, by gathering together its strength,
it applies earnestly to learning and to the investigating of things, it
quite dissolves and unhinges the body: finally, when with an ambitious
emulation it exerts itself to speak and harangue both in private and
public, it inflames the body and relaxes it. For, as RAMAZZINI observes,
the soul and body are united by so firm a league, that all the advantages
and disadvantages of the one must affect the other; and as the soul is
rendered languid in the mental functions, and become stupified in the
same manner by the too great application of the mind to the study of
wisdom, the body must unavoidably pine away, the animal spirits being
consum’d, which are the only instruments of rightly performing both
material and spiritual operations[2].” These are indeed observations
highly just. For he who is not ignorant what a multitude of nerves there
are in the animal system, who is sensible that there is no function that
can be performed without them, will easily apprehend that by the fatigue
of the medulla a languor may be brought upon all the nerves, so that the
several functions may be weakened, and the strength of the body may,
without its being exercised, be totally exhausted.

It is universally known that there are books compos’d without any
strength of genius, which appear quite insipid and unaffecting to
the reader, and only tire the eyes; but those that are compos’d with
an exquisite force of ideas, and with an exact connexion of thought,
elevate the soul, and fatigue it with the very pleasure, which, the more
compleat, lasting, and frequent it is, breaks the man the more[3].

MALEBRANCHE was seized with dreadful palpitations in reading DESCARTES’S
Man; and there is still living at Paris a professor of rhetoric, who
fainted away whilst he was perusing some of the sublime passages of
HOMER[4].

The head itself, and the nerves, and the stomach which is fuller of
nerves than any other part, first suffer for the errors of the mind.

An eminent person, who had impair’d his health by too intense an
application to study, was immediately seiz’d by a terrible vertigo,
if he happen’d to listen attentively to a person telling a story. He
likewise complained, that nothing could give him greater uneasiness than
his attempting to recall the memory of any thing, for then he was put
to the greatest pain imaginable, and sometimes seiz’d with a fainting
fit, attended with a sense of extreme lassitude. Nor could he desist
from his effort after he had once begun it, though he labour’d ever so
much for that purpose; but was under a necessity of proceeding as he had
begun, till he fainted away[5]. The illustrious VIRIDET, formerly my
fellow-citizen, knew a woman who, whenever she us’d any application of
mind, was seiz’d with a severe fit of the colic[6]. And a late author
speaks of a man who never either thought intensely, or experienc’d any
lively sensation, or was put in a passion, but his whole arm immediately
swell’d up[7]. Both of which cases may be explained by the defect of the
nerves alone, and the action of the mind upon the nerves.

Daily observation proves the force of the mind’s action upon the stomach;
and this every man has an opportunity of experiencing in himself; for
the more intensely any man thinks, and the more strongly he exerts the
reflecting powers of his mind, the more slowly and with the greater
difficulty, _cæteris paribus_, does he digest what he eats; and, on the
other hand, the freer a man’s mind is from reflexion, the more readily
and the better he digests. It is observable that fools always eat and
drink a great deal, and yet digest perfectly well, even though they
lead a sedentary life, and do not surpass others either in the bulk or
strength of their bodies: whilst men of genius and abilities, though
they have strong muscles, and take exercise sufficient, are obnoxious
to crudities in the stomach and slowness of concoction [8]. BOERHAAVE,
who resided a long time in a city renown’d for learning, has observ’d
that studies excite a disagreeable sensation at the upper orifice of
the stomach; and that, if this be neglected by the studious, madness
ensues[9]. My illustrious friend POME knew a man of learning, who had
made his stomach so infirm by intense application, that immediately after
eating he vomited[10]. I myself have seen some, who, when their minds
were wearied out with constant study, being taken ill, at first lost all
appetite, then were seiz’d with a weakness of their whole bodies, and at
last with dreadful paroxysms, which began with vomiting, and ended in
convulsions and a total privation of their senses.

Soon, by an unavoidable fatality, the disorder that had affected the body
recoils upon the mind; for the Author of nature has ordain’d that most of
the operations of the latter should stand in need of the assistance of
the former; which has given occasion to the following just observation of
PLINY the younger[11], and long before him it was observed by DEMOCRITUS,
that the mind is supported by what supports the body. “Augescit mens
cum adest sanitas, adeoque huic ut prospiciant, qui recte sentiant
consentaneum est: ubi vero corporis habitus dolet nec mens ad virtutis
meditationem est alacris.” “The mind acquires new vigour whilst the body
is in health; therefore all those who think justly will take care of the
latter: but, when the body is in a painful state, the mind is less alert
in the meditation of virtue[12].” Should it then seem surprising, if,
when the tenor of the brain and nerves is broken by the efforts of the
mind, the latter should decline in its turn? First of all it is depriv’d
of its fortitude; distrust, terror, and melancholy, seize upon it; and
he who would have stood undaunted amidst a falling world a few months
before, is every moment fill’d with terror and consternation, as soon as
his nerves are affected by a hypochondriac disorder. Relentless tyrants
may have condemn’d to death philosophers whom they hated; but it never
was in their power to subject them to the dread of death, which they had
long shaken off. O how much more cruel would they have been, if they had
granted them their lives, and had it in their power to torment their
minds with hypochondriacal terrors!

Thus render’d unequal to the task of study, the learned are at last under
a necessity of quitting their belov’d pursuits; for, as the strength of
their nerves diminishes, their attention fails, the memory begins to lose
its tenaciousness, the ideas are obscur’d, and an uneasy sensation of
heat over the whole head, a dreadful palpitation, the most extraordinary
weakness, and a groundless fear of approaching death, oblige them to
discontinue their application. Their strength being at last repair’d
by rest, nourishing aliments, and exercise, they renew their assiduity
in study, but are soon oblig’d to quit their books as before. Thus the
whole day is lost; and when evening approaches and they retire to bed,
their weakness and anxiety make them pass their nights most dismally,
whilst the great mobility of their nerves prevents their sleeping, and
sometimes increases to such a degree as totally to deprive them of the
power of thinking. I know a young man, upon whom an intense application
to study had this extraordinary effect, that, if he read even a few
pages, he was torn with convulsions of the muscles of the head and face,
which assum’d the appearance of ropes stretch’d very tight.

Nor does too intense an application produce only slight and transient
convulsions of the muscles; it likewise renews and generates the most
dreadful nervous disorders. GALEN[13] mentions a grammarian, who was
seized with a fit of the epilepsy, whenever he meditated profoundly,
or taught with vehemence. I myself have seen instances of it. And the
illustrious VAN SWIETEN laments the case of youths of the brightest
hopes, who have been seiz’d with a dreadful and incurable epilepsy, upon
being compell’d by severe masters to apply to their studies with scarce
any intervals of relaxation. HOFFMAN[14] makes mention of a young man,
who, as often as he weary’d out his memory and his genius by attentive
study, was seiz’d with a momentary epilepsy, a palpitation of the heart,
and a trance; but when he remitted of his assiduity, was always tolerably
well. This the celebrated PETRARCH likewise unhappily experienc’d, being
seiz’d with an epilepsy through his great application to study, to
which he was immoderately attach’d. In a public promotion, one of the
candidates for literary honour, after having pursu’d his studies with
the moil arduous application both day and night, through a too great
attention to his oration, that he might be able to say it accurately by
heart, was suddenly seiz’d with a catalepsy and fell down[15].

The labour of the mind not only produces nervous disorders, but,
by means of the nerves, gives rise to other complaints. An eminent
mathematician, who was troubled with an hereditary gout, and had always
liv’d soberly and chastely, hasten’d a paroxysm by applying a long
time to the solution of a difficult problem[16]. And the case of the
chevalier DE PERNAY is very extraordinary. After four months of the
closest study imaginable, and without any previous disorder, his beard
fell first, then his eye-lashes, then his eye-brows, then the hair of
his head, and finally all the hairs of his body[17]. Did this proceed
from the great relaxation of the roots, from which the hairs grow; or
from the want of nutrition? Certain it is, that an intense application
of mind relaxes the whole corporeal frame, and prevents all nutrition
for two reasons; for this is the effect of thought, not upon all, but
upon most constitutions, that it accelerates the pulse, and produces a
fever, which, by dissolving the nourishing jelly of the fluids, occasions
paleness, leanness, consumption, and a sort of wasting of the nerves; on
the other hand, the cessation of the action of the nerves, is capable
of producing it. Nor does it less cease in the whole body, whilst it is
obstructed by application of mind, than when it is stopped by a swelling
or a ligature in any part. We should not be too inquisitive in prying
into causes; and many circumstances relating to nervous disorders will
for ever remain unknown: but if any one should be curious to know how the
too great tension of the nerves is hurtful, I will briefly give him my
sense of the matter. The body is exhausted by too great an evacuation;
hence arises weakness, an extraordinary tenuity of the humours, and, what
it is generally productive of, a diseased mobility. Suppose the blood
were to run copiously from a wound, or the gastric fluids were to be
pour’d forth by the anus, or the breasts suck’d too long, or a greater
discharge of saliva made by spitting, or the wretched body were to be
troubled with a long diabetes, or in short, any other evacuations were
too much increased, the strength would decline, and the health be lost;
but whilst the nerves act, their fluid runs out of the body, and carries
off the strength with it; nor is there any thing in the body either more
labour’d, more necessary in many animal functions, or more intimately
connected with strength. In studious men, therefore, a perpetual
dissipation of the nervous fluid springs from the incessant action of
the nerves, attended with weakness, and an extraordinary mobility, from
whence all the above-mention’d diseases easily take rise; these are very
dreadful, but diseases still more dreadful remain to be describ’d.

It is not easy for the mind not to throw out at will such motions as it
has powerfully conceiv’d; and this is a second cause of the diseases of
studious men, from whence spring so many errors and wanderings of the
mind, to be chang’d for death only, so many phrenzies and deliriums:
for whilst ideas no longer answer to their external objects, but to the
internal disposition of the brain, the latter being agitated by its own
motion, either entirely, or in part, is unable to receive new vibrations,
to be transmitted, all, or some, by the senses; whereas those that are
spontaneous cannot be check’d.

The brain of BLAISE PASCHAL was so vitiated by passing his life in the
laborious exercises of study, thought, and imagination, that certain
fibres, agitated by incessant motion, made him perpetually feel a
sensation, which seem’d to be excited by a globe of fire being plac’d on
one side of him; and his reason being overpower’d by the disorder of his
nerves, he could scarce banish the idea of the fiery globe being actually
present. SPINELLO painted the devils thrown from Heaven by the Almighty,
and gave so fierce a countenance to Lucifer, that he was struck with
horror himself; and during the remainder of his life, his imagination
was continually haunted with the figure of that demon, upbraiding him
with having made so shocking a portrait of him. There are many others,
whom the force of genius too much rous’d, has for ever hurried beyond
the boundaries of truth. GASPAR BARLÆUS, who was at once an orator, a
poet, and a physician, was not ignorant of this danger, concerning which
he admonish’d his friend CONSTANTIUS HUYGENS[18]; but being blind with
regard to himself, he by immoderate studies so broke the force of his
sensorium, that he thought his body was made of butter, and carefully
shun’d the fire, lest it should melt him, till being at last tir’d of
his excruciating fears, he leapt into a well. I must still grieve for
a friend of a penetrating genius, an excellent understanding, of strict
morals, and one that seem’d born for a better fate; who being animated
with too great a love of learning, and in particular of the medical
science, by reading night and day, observing, making experiments, and
meditating, at first became sleepless; then began to talk, sometimes
incoherently, and sometimes rationally; at last run mad, and having
scarcely escap’d with life, never recover’d his reason. I have known many
others, who by study alone were first rendered phrantic, or crazy, and
at length became idiots. I love, esteem, and honour an illustrious man,
and a man of extraordinary abilities, who being twelve hours intent upon
settling a difficult memorial, after having finish’d his work, became
delirious till a soft sleep quieted the state of his nerves. Observers
give us accounts of many similar cases, and I was inform’d by a witness
who may be confided in, that PETER JURIEU was formerly famous for his
talent at disputing, by his labours in writing books of controversy,
and expounding the apocalypse, so disorder’d his brain, that though he
thought like a man of sense in other respects, he was firmly persuaded
that the seven fits of the cholic, with which he was tormented, had been
occasion’d by a constant fight between seven horsemen that were shut up
in his bowels. There have been many instances of persons, who thought
themselves metamorphos’d into lanterns, and who complain’d of having lost
their thighs.

But those are affected in the most dangerous manner, who dwell too long
upon one and the same thought; for thus one part of the sensorium being
longer stretch’d than the rest, without being ever reliev’d by the others
in their turn, is the sooner broke; for as the body suffers more if one
or but a few muscles alone act, so the brain is the less fatigued when
various parts act successively; the part which discontinues recovers its
strength, whilst the others are at work; and that is durable which does
not want alternate rest.

Many years ago I knew a woman, who appear’d to have very good sense
for five and twenty years; but having, unhappily for her, embrac’d the
sect of the Herrenhutters, she became entirely inflam’d by the love of
our blessed Saviour, and of him alone; and she dwelling entirely upon
this idea both day and night, it so broke the tone of her brain, that
in a few months time she became an idiot; but still she was so mindful
of her Lamb, that visiting her every day for half a year together, and
frequently addressing my discourse to her, I could never hear any other
words from her than _my sweet Lamb_; and this she utter’d every half
hour, with downcast eyes, and was the only word she spoke for a year and
a half; which time being elapsed, she pin’d away and died. And to pass
by other examples, there was not long ago in this academy, a young man
of bright hopes, who being too earnestly solicitous about squaring the
circle, died mad in the Paris hospital.

The third cause of the disorders of the brain, is, that law to which the
human machine is subjected; that a new quantity of blood should be added
to the part that acts. The illustrious MORGAGNI knew a man of learning
at Boulogne, who whenever he gave his mind to abstract meditations in
the morning, before he rose, was sure to bleed at the nose for a short
time after[19]. Therefore as often as the brain increases its action, it
is moisten’d with an additional quantity of blood, which, giving a new
tension and a quicker motion to the vessels, brings on both the sense
of pain and heat already mentioned, and many more grievous symptoms;
namely, according to the different state of the brain, of the blood, and
external objects, it occasions dilatations of the veins and arteries,
obstructions of the nerves, inflammations, suppurations, scirrhous
tumours, ulcers, dropsies, and thence head-achs, deliriums, drowsiness,
convulsions, lethargy, apoplexy, and continual obstinate watchings, which
cruelly torment the studious, and afflict them with new diseases; for
what diseases, what perturbations of the mind do not protracted watchings
give rise to? The great BOERHAAVE was six weeks without sleep, after
profound study and meditation; and at the same time so indifferent to
every thing, that scarce any object whatever affected him[20]. And which
of you, learned auditors, has not found by experience, that a slight and
disturb’d sleep, a sleep that scarce gives refreshment, generally follows
a day pass’d in study. A slight irritation of the brain causes want of
sleep; from one more considerable arise convulsions and drowsiness; from
the greatest of all a mortal apoplexy, which disorder often puts an end
to the lives of learned men. The reason is, that that part suffers which
was guilty of the excess, and whilst the strength of the brain is relax’d
by study, and fresh blood is forc’d into it, it must sooner or later be
quite overwhelm’d, especially at the time that some new cause adds force
to the blood that impells it; thence it has frequently come to pass, that
learned divines in preaching, and learned professors in delivering their
lectures, or disputing, as was the case with the celebrated CURTIUS
at Leipsick, expir’d on their very chairs; and LIVY the historian has
preserv’d to us the history of king ATTALUS, who died in the assembly at
Thebes, whilst he was animating the Bœotians by an harangue to enter into
an alliance with the Romans.

I saw a reverend pastor, who on Whitsun-sunday, after having preach’d
long and with vehemence, whilst he was distributing the host to the
people, was first seiz’d with trembling, then stammer’d, then was
delirious, then fell down in an apoplectic fit, and continuing delirious
ever after, though in an advanc’d age, liv’d for some months in a state
of infancy. The celebrated MORGAGNI likewise mentions a preaching monk,
who was seiz’d with a violent apoplexy before his congregation, and
quickly died; his vehemence of delivery conspiring with a plethora to
destroy him[21]. A professor at Berne, deeply versed in the oriental
languages, a man in the prime of life, but of indefatigable industry, not
long since sunk into a second infancy, and a state of idiotism, his brain
being overflow’d by water, which stagnated in it[22].

We must not forget, in enumerating the injuries suffered by the brain
from this overflowing of the blood, that the disorder of the nerves
which causes the hypochondriac disposition, is increased; their little
tubes being dilated are constantly weaken’d, grow soft, and make less
resistance to impressions, which is one of the chief causes of the
hypochondriac disorder.

Nor do the sufferings of studious men end here, since from another
law, which holds equally in the animal œconomy, a fourth cause of the
disorders of the learned springs from an over violent labour of the mind;
for the animal fibre is indurated by being used, the whole machine grows
callous as it grows old; the parts that are exercised by labour become
hardened in workmen; the brain of studious men contracts a callosity,
so that becoming unequal to the task of forming ideas, they fall into a
premature dotage: thus the too great softness of an infant’s brain, and
the too great hardness of a brain occasioned by study, are equally ill
adapted to produce those vibrations, without which the force of thought
is lost. Let the fibre be moisten’d with water, or stiffened with lime
and sand, it in both cases becomes equally incapable of performing its
function. At first the memory is impair’d, as GALEN justly observes, and
then reason itself is disturb’d[23].

Nor is there any necessity that the mind should meditate great and
sublime objects, to impair the strength of the nervous system; a too
protracted use of the eyes has often given rise to innumerable nervous
disorders; concerning which, the testimony of GUNZIUS is of the utmost
authority[24]. And every weak man must know by experience, how much too
great a use of the eyes weakens the head. Of this I have already given an
example, and have often found it by experience; for when I contemplate
any object a considerable time, after the fit of a fever, or any other
disorder, and before my health is quite recovered, I am seiz’d with a
vertigo, a sickness in the stomach, and a disagreeable listlessness of
the whole body.

In order to vindicate literature from the charge brought against it, you
will doubtless object, that many men of profound learning, have liv’d to
the most advanc’d age, and retain’d their powers both of mind and body
unimpair’d to the last. I have heard of many, I have myself seen more;
nor can either you or I ever forget that truly illustrious man, that man
of universal learning, who as he was worthy of it, enjoy’d general love
and veneration; who was the ornament, honour, and delight of this academy
for above fifty years, and whom we all with equal wonder and satisfaction
saw enter upon his 90th year, without either his reason, or his senses
being in the least impair’d. But all are not equally happy, and there are
few men endued with such strength, both of mind and body, as to undergo
such labours with impunity, if even those can be said to undergo them
with impunity, who attain to that stage of life, which they perhaps would
have greatly exceeded, had they liv’d in a different manner. Some men
are by nature insatiable in drinking wine, others are born cormorants of
books, and never glutted with the acquisition of learning: nor should
it be pass’d over in silence, that almost all the learned men, who are
look’d upon as its masters by the human species, all liv’d to a great
age; as HOMER, DEMOCRITUS, PARMENIDES, HIPPOCRATES, PLATO, PLUTARCH,
Lord BACON, GALILÆO, HARVEY, WALLIS, BOYLE, LOCKE, LEIBNITZ, NEWTON,
BOERHAAVE. Can it then justly be inferred, that violent exercises of
the mind are not hurtful? Take care how you draw so false a conclusion?
But, as I said awhile ago, some men are born with happy constitutions
for meditation, and perhaps that excellent constitution of the fibres,
productive of longevity, is the same that produces great geniuses;

    _Mens sana in corpore sano_,

    _A sound mind in a healthy body_;

and consequently the great men, whom I have just mention’d, owed their
reputation more to their extraordinary genius, than to industry and
application; and prevented the ill effects of their severer studies, by
allowing themselves intervals of leisure, by taking proper exercise, and
by the dissipation both of business and amusement. Nor did they lead
the life of abstracted students, a species of men little known to the
ancients, and who took their rise first at the declension of literature,
were renew’d at its revival, and may be properly compar’d to the Indian
fakirs; for both bid farewell to the human race, and both of their
own accord, and generally without any emolument to society, emaciate
and inflict austerities upon themselves; the former by the sun, by
cold, by nails, by chains, by whips; the latter by books, manuscripts,
coins, monuments, and almost all by inaction, and the want of bodily
exercise. This is another, and a most prolific source of the disorders
which afflict men addicted to study; for the human machine was form’d
and intended for action by the supreme artificer: therefore health is
inseparable from action, which will be easily conceiv’d by whoever
examines the human body with attention.

It consists of containing and moving vessels, contained and moved fluids:
if the fibres or vessels have a proper tone, if the fluids have a
proper consistence, if the motions, by which they should be continually
agitated, are neither too violent, nor deficient, we enjoy a good state
of health. But it should be taken into consideration, that motion is
here the chief agent, for, that alone being chang’d, the whole state
of the solids and fluids is chang’d likewise: if it be increased, the
solids grow harder, and the fluids are compress’d; if it be diminished,
the fibre becomes relaxed, the density of the blood is lessened, for
the whole body is form’d of a chyle, which is softer and lighter than
any part of the body, either solid or fluid, whose small particles a
continual motion unites and strongly compresses; and if this motion
should fail, the parts must prove deficient in their due firmness.

But the heart is the source of all the motions in the animal machine, the
principle which puts the whole mass of fluids in motion, but is not alone
sufficient for that purpose; wherefore nature has given it many helps,
which never discontinue or remit, but the circulation becomes slower,
and diseases arise from the motion of the fluids being retarded. The
chief of these helps is the muscular motion, whose extraordinary force in
quickening the circulation, the most ignorant surgeon every day displays
to the eyes of all spectators, by an easy experiment, when upon opening a
vein he bids the patient move some cylindrical instrument round about in
his hand, in order to accelerate the emission of the blood: nay, every
man may easily perceive in himself, how much the quickness of the pulse
is increased by the motion of the body; and these are the effects of
motion, it sharpens the appetite, it strengthens the fibres, keeps up a
due temperature of the fluids, promotes all the excretions, fortifies the
mind, and gives a pleasing sensation to the whole nervous system; whereas
by too great sloth, the muscular strength is first destroy’d for want of
practice; and from a neglect of exercise there springs an impotence of
motion: the circulation which is carried on only by the strength of the
heart and the vessels, and destitute of external helps, first languishes
in the most minute vessels, and then in every part of the body; the heat
decreases, the humours stagnate, and contract a vitious disposition; for
some of them lose part of their density, others part of their tenuity,
and they all become glutinous, and of consequence unfit for secretions;
therefore what should be secreted is retain’d, the body is loaded with
a mass of adventitious humours, it is destroy’d by their acrimony, the
vigour of life is benumb’d, the strength declines, the blood is dissolved
to water; hence arises a dropsy, a disorder in a manner epidemical to men
of learning, by which the brain is often affected. An instance of this I
lately saw, with concern, in an eminent man, whose case I discover’d too
late, and who not by literary pursuits, but other exercises of the mind,
and total inaction of body, had broke a constitution which once was
robust[25].

Those parts suffer the most, which having but weak solids, they want
external helps more than any others; hence those organs are most affected
by inaction, which, being contained in the abdomen, perform the first
digestion of the aliments: the strength of the stomach is diminish’d, the
nature of the gastric fluid is chang’d, the aliments make a longer stay
in it, and, not being sufficiently subdu’d by the animal force, they go
through their spontaneous changes which they would have undergone out of
the body. Most vegetables retain their tartness, which, by vellicating
the nerves, occasions pains and convulsions; acid eructations arise, the
cardia suffers pain, the throat is parched, and the teeth blunted. On
the contrary, both flesh and eggs rot, and fat aliments grow rank: hence
proceed putrid eructations, immoderate thirst, and continual fluxes;
digestion is always difficult, troublesome, and malignant; the aliments
cease to afford nourishment, nor do they any longer repair, but irritate
and weaken.

The exhaling vessels no longer pour forth a dewy, mild, and saponaceous
lymph, but they throw out a thick glue, which affects the sick with a
constant pain and sense of a heavy weight, and of cold at the stomach,
and creates the utmost loathing. The consequence is the same when the
intestines, being of the same structure with the stomach, suffer the
same injuries: the action of respiration first begins to fail, whose
alternate compressions, whilst it is accelerated by the muscular motion,
compress and strain all the viscera of the abdomen; their irritability is
lost, the body is generally costive; there is here likewise accumulated,
a troublesome phlegm, the prolific mother of diseases. Thus it once
happen’d to the celebrated JUSTUS LIPSIUS, professor of history at
Leyden, who being long ill, and under the care of his illustrious
colleague and friend HEURNIUS, found no relief till he had voided a
substance resembling the intestines both in figure and colour; it was a
tough and viscid phlegm, gradually collected in the whole tube of the
intestines, through a sedentary life wasted by study; and this phlegm,
turning to putrefaction, made a jakes of the whole body. The fomes of the
disease being thus purg’d off, he was restor’d to health[26].

The collected excrements compress with their bulk the neighbouring
parts, irritate the intestines by their corruption, and by absorbing the
putrid matter infect the whole mass of blood. From all these causes put
together arise those excruciating pains in the bowels which often torment
the studious, and are with difficulty cur’d, as they are perpetually
renew’d by errors in diet[27]. Hence that troublesome flatulency, so
hurtful to sedentary men, which torments the learned a thousand different
ways, and often passes for other disorders.

The intestines are not only affected, but the functions of the
neighbouring parts are disturb’d, as well from the violence of the
compression as from their own diseases; the pancreatic juice grows vapid
and stale, the functions of the spleen are vitiated, the repositories of
the bile are much disturb’d; by its stagnation it loads the liver, forms
obstructions in it, thickens and grows hard itself, and flows slowly to
the intestines; whence their disorders, especially those of the jejunum,
and vices of the chyle, increase; being scarce able to pass through the
narrow neck of the cystic duct, it often concretes into a stone, and
occasions those severe colics with which the celebrated IGNATIUS, founder
of the Jesuits, was formerly afflicted, and with which the learned are
often tormented[28]. If at length by stagnating it putrifies, it then
erodes, ulcerates, inflames, and assumes the appearance of all the
innumerable disorders of the liver, and produces inconceivable anxieties.
These are likewise caus’d, though with less danger, by that cruel
disease call’d the hypochondriac; the first species of which, mention’d
above, and call’d the nervous, is occasion’d by excessive labour of the
mind; the other, I mean the abdominal species, arises from a disturb’d
circulation in the abdomen. With both these disorders the learned are
afflicted, and therefore seldom or never live free from this evil; and,
whilst one of these adds force to another, they are seldom entirely cur’d
of them[29].

Considering they occur so frequently, it is hardly necessary to give
examples; but if I were to cite examples, the first that would occur
to my mind would be that of the illustrious SWAMMERDAM, that sagacious
inquirer into nature, who was so full of atrabilary humours, that he
scarce vouchsafed to answer those who spoke to him, but look’d upon them
with an unalter’d countenance; and, when he took his seat as professor,
sat with a face of astonishment, and made no answer to the objections
of his opponents. Finally, having, before his death, wasted away with a
phrantic melancholy, he burn’d all the manuscripts he had by him in a
fit of madness: being reduced in appearance to a skeleton and the mere
figure of a man[30], he died at length of a consumption.

It has indeed been observ’d, that this species of melancholy in some
measure promotes learning, by increasing the penetration; for, whilst
melancholy men are intent upon one idea only, the mind contemplates this
object alone, and considers it on every side; nor is it distracted by
other pursuits. But who ever proceeded to this pitch of madness, as to
desire to purchase an increase of discernment at such a price? Of what
advantage is science without health? He knows too much, who is render’d
unhappy by his knowledge.

It cannot indeed be denied, that there are men whom nature has endow’d
with a Milonian stomach, and intestines of iron, who can bear with
impunity the labour of the mind, bodily inaction, and excesses of
gluttony. But are they therefore more happy? By no means; for then the
vessels are overwhelm’d by the load of humours, the cellular membrane
swells with fat, the viscera are press’d on every side, the whole habit
grows turgid, they become heavy and indolent, the slightest motion puts
them quite out of breath, and they sweat all over; at last they die
before their time, either of apoplexy, a suffocating catarrh, or other
diseases occasion’d by plethora: and it has been justly observ’d, that
too strong a stomach has often prov’d fatal to the learned[31].

There is no part of the body which is not at last affected by inaction;
for the blood being vitiated, all the parts, which it washes, catch
the infection sooner or later; the lungs are overwhelm’d with a mucous
substance, this gives rise to a cough, a shortness of breath, an asthma,
an imposthume. This the illustrious TRIGLANDUS unhappily experienc’d,
who, having contracted a bad habit of body by a studious and sedentary
life, from which BOERHAAVE himself dissuaded him, wasted away with
an imposthume and died, after having suffer’d the most excruciating
torments[32]. By the mucous matter being harden’d the lungs of SWAMMERDAM
were turn’d into a quarry, and he spit up small stones a long time before
his death.

That the stone, and other severer disorders of the bladder, are the
fruits of too assiduous an application to learning, is prov’d by the
sad experience of HEURNIUS, CASAUBON, BEVEROVICIUS, SYDENHAM, and many
others, amongst whom may be reckon’d the illustrious exile of Geneva, to
whom Britain now boasts of having afforded an asylum[33].

Whilst all the excretions are disturb’d, the chief of them all, namely
cuticular perspiration, is not free from disease. As perspiration is
greatly promoted by muscular motion, which both prepares humours for
secretion, and gives strength to the exhaling vessels; so is it greatly
interrupted by the want of that motion; the humour that ought to be
excreted is retain’d, and pollutes the whole mass of the fluids, and
gives rise to rheumatic or catarrhous disorders and a troublesome phlegm.
Of this HORACE complained long since, and with this complaint almost all
men of learning are afflicted; for they can scarce read or write for any
time, but they are immediately troubled with a slight running of the
nose, or seiz’d with a cough.

From the same source are derived those irregular fevers, which often
occur without any visible cause, whilst the unperspirable humours, which
have been generated by the defect of the stomach, and the want of motion,
are unable to pass the cutaneous vessels.

Perpetual rest is alone able to torture those nerves, which have been
weakened by the labours of the mind; and it often quite destroys them,
even in those who equally give themselves up to indolence both mental
and corporeal. For the nervous system is the last work of the human
machine, and if any function fails, the nerves are immediately affected;
so that often from their defect, whenever it appears, there results a
well-grounded suspicion of a disease in the stomach, or in some other
part. They are therefore vitiated in the learned for two reasons;
for, being plac’d between the mind and body, they are punish’d though
innocent, let which of the two be in fault; nor do they however go
unrevenged; for the injuries they suffer on one part they carry over to
t’other, and thus, by a vicious circle, the mind hurts the body, and the
body impairs the mind, and they with one accord injure and weaken the
nerves.

The seminal fluid, which has been thought by some great men not to be
very different from the nervous liquor, is likewise depriv’d of its
force; and upon this principle, and from an accurate consideration of
what each part in a father contributes to the formation of a son, it
perhaps is not badly accounted for, why strong and illustrious sons are
seldom the offspring of illustrious men: for the _punctum saliens_ is
contaminated at the first moment of life, whence it receives an injury
which is not afterwards to be repair’d by any art; and whilst the mind
of the father was entirely given up to meditation, and his corporeal
functions totally neglected, the vivifying liquor was perhaps defrauded
of that part of elaboration which it should have had from the brain, so
as to give a proper tone to the brain of the embryo.

From that general laxity of the fibres, which is demonstrated to the
senses themselves by the softness of the muscles, by the force of the
artery, and by that laxity of the gums which throws out sound teeth
without any pain; from that general laxity, I say, arises that weakness
which oppresses so many learned men, and which I lately lamented to see,
whilst, as a friend and physician, I sat by our beloved ALPHONSUS[34],
to whom the wishes of the public had promis’d the age of NESTOR; and all
the hopes I had of his recovering his health were immediately banish’d,
by a weakness greater than any I remember ever to have seen, and which
the Herculean labours of his mind had brought upon a thin body. How
great and irrepairable a loss was then sustain’d by religion, virtue,
the church, the city, his unfortunate family, and the youth of this
academy! What a man, what a colleague, what a friend have we lost,
illustrious professors! one who, as EUPHRATES of old, was remarkable for
the greatest sanctity of manners, for the utmost care in the discharge
of all the duties incumbent upon him, which were many in number; one
whose complaisance was equal, who was entirely free from austerity, whose
presence excited reverence, and not dread, for he was severe upon vices,
not upon men; whose learning was extensive, whose discourse was copious,
various, and, above all, pleasing, and yet not without a Platonic
sublimity; one, in short, who was capable of persuading and working upon
such as were most averse to his documents: having liv’d in the utmost
veneration, he left behind him the highest regret for his loss. But to
return to our subject from this sad digression.

Thus have I treated of the two first causes of the diseases of the
learned; others remain still to be spoken of; and the first that occurs,
whilst I am upon the subject of inaction, is the very posture of constant
sitting, with the body stooping, and the legs bent; for this both hurts
the lower extremities, and, by obstructing the viscera of the abdomen,
soon occasions all sorts of disorders arising from indigestion: and
those learned doctors prudently consult their health, who indulge their
meditations, not indeed standing, for that posture is not without its
inconveniences, but walking. And this is one of the bad effects of
sitting, that it greatly obstructs the passage of the blood in the
abdominal veins, which makes it stagnate at the anus, where it meets with
less resistance, and causes those shocking piles that torment so many
literati, and, though praised by some, certainly do much more harm than
good.

Nocturnal lucubrations, which are hurtful upon many accounts, must have
their place amongst the causes of disorders; for whilst a great part of
the night is spent in study, sufficient time is not allow’d for sleep;
nor does a gentle slumber succeed meditation; a circumstance which I
have already lamented: for the oscillations of the fibres of the brain
still continue, and that full ease of the internal senses is wanting
which alone is capable of repairing our lost strength. They likewise
pitch upon an unreasonable time for sleep; for nature has assigned the
first approach of night as the proper time for beginning to repose; the
night invites to sleep as well as the unwholesome air, and to this end
its darkness and silence contribute: besides, the nocturnal air is cold
and moist, and, when the sun retires, most animals feel their strength
diminish’d, and night forces some of them to sleep even against their
inclinations, as it does many plants.

The night air is so unfavourable to study, that the celebrated VAN
SWIETEN knew a gouty man, in whom the slightest application of mind, and
even the reading of a letter, after sun-set, occasion’d a fit of the
gout. Nor should we forget that study forces the blood into the brain,
and that nothing can be more dangerous than to study in bed; for both
sleep, and the posture of the body in sleep, increases the quantity of
blood in the skull.

Therefore nocturnal studies produce all those disorders which the want
of rest gives rise to; the organs of sense are principally affected;
their strength is exhausted, the fibres are either worn or agitated
by violent motions; hence arise an incoherent series of thoughts, a
luxuriant imagination, deliriums, dreadful head-achs, and, finally, a
total privation of sleep, scarce to be cur’d by remedies, and which often
occasions fatal disorders.

The injuries of watching are increased by the ill effects of candles,
which infect the air by their gross vapour, so pernicious to the lungs,
the eyes, and the nerves. It is, therefore, the highest advantage
imaginable to go to bed betimes, and rise early in the morning. _Aurora
musis amica_: Aurora favours the muses.

The close air, which they always use, is hurtful; but I shall speak of
the air hereafter. Nor should their dirtiness be forgotten, as some
learned men, entirely neglecting the care of their bodies, and not at all
sollicitous about cleanliness, disgust others, and bring upon themselves
those disorders which proceed from obstructed perspiration: for how can
that skin perspire, whose pores are stopped up with dirt. Most of them
are extremely faulty with respect to their teeth, which, being filled
with putrid filth, and exhaling a most nauseous stench, first infect all
the adjacent parts, and the very saliva of the sick person; soon after
cause violent pains, and at last, falling before the time, leave the
stomach destitute of the powerful aid of mastication.

Akin to dirtiness is the pernicious custom of some, who, deaf to the
calls of nature, defer going to stool, and suppress their urine a long
time, to avoid interrupting their studies; not reflecting that many
dreadful disorders spring from this source.

For by too long a delay the secreted humours become too putrid, are
attenuated, irritate the intestines or the bladder, vitiate the mucous
matter, and sometimes occasion grievous disorders of the particular
organ; the putrid matter being absorb’d by the vessels with which all
the cavities of the body abound, pollutes the blood; and, which is
still worse, the nerves become disused to obey the stimulus; nay, they
sometimes, by too much tension, begin to grow paralytic; so that the
expulsive force, for the voiding of excrements or urine, almost entirely
ceases, and should every day be renew’d by art. Whilst the illustrious
TYCHO BRAHE, riding in the same chariot with the emperor, suppress’d his
urine, he pay’d for his ill-tim’d modesty by death; and I even now have
under my care a man of learning, who by a long suppression of his urine
became unable to contain it; nor can he void it when he thinks proper,
but it runs from him night and day by drops.

Retirement from all human society is likewise hurtful to them; for man,
whom nature made for man, she intended also should be benefited by
society.

But nothing renders study and application more pernicious than the
sadness that accompanies them: study is capable of clouding the temper of
the happiest man with melancholy: if real and external causes of grief
are added to this, the mind, overwhelm’d with so many strokes, at last
sinks under them, and in its own ruin involves that of the body. Anxious
cares are likewise hurtful; so that I can hardly conceive how great men,
whom the difficulty of their undertakings kept in unremitting meditation,
and whom the uncertainty of events fill’d with continual anxiety, could
go through with such great undertakings. Nature endow’d CÆSAR, MAHOMET,
CROMWELL, PAOLI, and some few more, with faculties which she refused
other mortals, and which, notwithstanding, would scarce have enabled them
to perform such great exploits without the assistance of sobriety and
incessant action.

We should not, however, imagine, that the learned alone destroy their
health by mental labour; it is of no consequence what the object is that
engages the mind, if it applies a considerable time and with earnestness,
it wastes both its own strength and that of the body. Kings, senators,
ministers, ambassadors, and all those concern’d in the administration of
public affairs, are subject to the same unhappy fate which the learned
deplore, if they labour with equal assiduity in transacting public
affairs, as the learned in perusing books. But it is their happiness,
that, in the various business and dissipation of their places, they are
oblig’d often to quit their closets, and even against their wills are, by
a salutary necessity, compell’d to take frequent exercise: the chief use
of this is, that it admirably prepares the blood for the generation of
fresh animal spirits, and in the same time it brings a greater quantity
of blood to the secerning organs, and so restores what thought had
exhausted, and frames new instruments for the thinking mind. But nothing
can force the studious from their books, and they are quite enervated by
inaction: to palliate which you will perhaps bring some examples of men
who have liv’d to a great age, though they used but little or no action.
There are but few men; but you will, I doubt not, bring many women. Take
notice, however, that, though they had not much muscular motion, they had
many other helps, by which nature promotes the circulation of the blood,
_viz._ an agreeable stirring of the passions, which excites, and does
not destroy; a constant chearfulness and eternal loquacity, and other
assistances of a similar nature: they likewise use but little food. The
case is quite different with the learned: they do not live with the same
sobriety; and therefore it is no wonder that they enjoy their health
worse than any other class of men.

Thus have I laid before you the chief causes, from which the diseases
incident to the studious take rise; and I should never make an end, were
I to enumerate the inferior causes, which professors have a bad custom
of assigning from their own invention: I shall therefore pass by all the
secondary causes. But there are men, truly learned, illustrious votaries
of the muses, who, besides the disorders that spring from too assiduous
an application of mind, experience others, owing to the nature of the
object that engages them. Anatomists often contract malignant fevers
by breathing putrid air, and other diseases from the corruption of the
bile, from the matter in which their hands are constantly immersed, a
slight excoriation arising, or an inconsiderable wound, which sometimes
end in their deaths. Chemical experiments are attended with danger,
and an acid smoke, of a very penetrating nature, would have kill’d the
great BOERHAAVE, if there had not been at hand an alcaline spirit, which
overcame the acid and expanded the compressed lungs. Botanists have been
often hurt by the plants for which they have so strong a passion. These,
and the like, rather relate to the disorders of artificers, (excuse the
expression); but this discourse turns upon the disorders which study
brings upon some of the organs.

The first that offer are the eyes, which constant attention so fatigues,
that I have often seen doctors who had not attain’d to their thirtieth
year, and yet could hardly bear the light, especially candle-light; and
were scarce able to read a few pages without their eyes being suffused
with tears, then growing dim, and at last quite incapable to distinguish
any object. But the eyes are much sooner and much more easily affected by
reading at night; for there is not a man living who has not experienc’d,
at least once in his life, how much they suffer by the motion of light
and the irritation of smoke.

Orators have disorders peculiar to themselves, which are of a very
grievous nature: for however reading aloud may be of service to the
lungs, vehement declamation is hurtful: and how often do preachers or
lawyers pass whole days and nights in their studies, when the lungs,
unequal to the efforts of speaking, are severely injur’d. How much
more happy are those pastors of the church, who cultivate learning,
but are kept from their studies by other avocations, being in this
respect equally privileg’d with the physicians, whom the health of their
fellow-creatures does not suffer to impair their own health by study.
Happy likewise are all those whom the nature of their business calls off
from study; for though they are not thereby exempted from the labours of
the mind, the change of their employments is however a great consolation
to them. But unhappy are those preachers, who, being exempt from other
ecclesiastical functions, live only to study, and compose eloquent
discourses; unhappy those lawyers, who are entirely taken up with
managing and pleading causes; for their health is insensibly impaired by
the life they lead, their throat, wind-pipe, and lungs, are irritated,
heated, and inflamed; hence proceed catarrhs, hoarseness, a broken voice,
spitting of blood, a cough, a fever, great weakness, and at last a
consumption; and, whilst they give light to others, they are extinguished
like the snuff of a candle, unless they take care of themselves. This is
what CICERO did, who, being told that he was beginning to be consumptive,
avoided pleading for two years, by the advice of his physicians; in
which time he recovered his strength and health, which had been greatly
impaired[35].

These, worthy auditors, are most of the disorders that are occasioned
by too great an attachment to study, or a continued application of the
mind to any object whatever: nor are we to imagine that all undergo
the same sufferings; much variety is here occasioned by the various
constitutions of men, by their different ages, and the diversity of
their external circumstances. There are few or no bodies but what have
some weak parts, which suffer the first attacks of every disorder. He
whose stomach is naturally weak, or who has rendered it so by living in
a manner not suited to his constitution, will first complain of pains
in the ventricle, whilst the nerves, which he received strong in a weak
body, are still in a good state. On the other hand, he who is troubled
with weak nerves, but has a good stomach, will long suffer all sorts of
nervous disorders, the digestion remaining unhurt.

He in whom the muscular or cellular fibres are relaxed, will complain
of lassitude, drowsiness, weakness, swellings, his head and stomach
remaining unhurt. Another will suffer all the disorders incident to the
lungs, who received them from nature not indued with a proper degree of
strength. In these the vascular system of the head is weak, they are
troubled with incessant head-achs, or bleeding at the nose, to which
other studious youths are obnoxious, their intense application to study
forcing the blood upwards. Finally, every man, according to the part
affected with weakness, is liable to complain of some disorders more than
others.

Even strength itself has its disadvantages; for whilst robust and
vigorous young men devote themselves to study with unbridled ardour,
the power of the soul, being rous’d and strongly stimulating the whole
system, so increases the action of the solids, that there arise diseases
occasion’d by too violent a motion, such as inflammations and malignant
fevers; and when these disorders are once begun, they return for some
years, till the strength being entirely broken, chronical disorders
succeed, according to the common fate of mankind.

A great deal depends upon the age, with regard to which we should not be
so indiscreet as to bear too hard upon youth, nor exact from them over
great tasks; for nothing so totally exhausts and destroys the strength.
I have often found boys of a penetrating genius, tinctured with learning
beyond what could be expected from their years, and always with some
concern, as I saw how it would end; because our youthful days should be
consecrated to exercise, and to acquiring strength by its means, and not
to severe study, which obstructs both vigour and growth.

There have been examples of boys, who before they had pass’d their
sixth year, appear’d by their sudden growth to be men: the last example
of this sort, we meet with in the memoirs of the French academy: but
listen to the sequel: the understanding continued that of a child in
a well set body, and, the strength being so soon exhausted, could
scarce support a life of twelve years. Whilst the powers of the mind,
or in other words, the strength of the brain surpass the age, nature,
which is unequal to many tasks, forgets the body; the whole machine is
overwhelm’d with languor, the fibres want strength, and severe disorders
bring on an untimely death. JOHN PHILIP BARATHIER lately afforded us an
illustrious and well known example of the truth of this observation.
You all lament another PHILIP, whom you knew, and whom I regret not
having known more intimately, who being from his early infancy endowed
with a penetrating genius, and addicted to study at that time of life,
which nature intended should be dedicated to strengthening the body, was
attack’d by the severest disorders, and could recover his health only by
the most abstemious diet, and by totally relinquishing his studies: but
soon, unmindful of his weakness, he by an untimely death paid for his
premature learning. May a better fate be reserv’d for LE FANCOIS, a youth
of fourteen, who, as I hear, has acquir’d a high reputation amongst the
French, by his genius and extraordinary erudition.

I have often seen with concern the children of peasants loaded with
labour above their age and strength, but a still worse error is
committed, when the mind of a child is forc’d to apply before the time,
and beyond its abilities; and this is generally productive of the worst
consequences, for the powers of the mind brought to maturity by a
pernicious art, are short-liv’d, and soon grow old: and who has not with
grief seen children of the brightest hopes, hardly give proofs of common
understanding, when grown up? The earth is a long time prepar’d to admit
seed, and before it is sown, receives that strength, which afterwards
impregnates it with fertility from the sun, the air, and the plough; then
the grain springs up, vegetates, flourishes, and brings good fruits to
maturity.

But if early studies are hurtful, it is no less dangerous to attach
oneself to study in an advanc’d age; for habit becomes gradually a second
nature when we begin from our tender age; but at an advanc’d period it
is no longer susceptible of new habits; and the fibres of the brain
accustom’d to rest, are torn before they can receive new and regular
motions. I not long since with difficulty cur’d a native of this country,
who in his fortieth year laying aside mercantile business, to pore
night and day over the works of NEWTON, CLARKE and LOCKE, had totally
disorder’d his brain. He recovered his health by remedies, by a cessation
of study, and amusing conversation; but the joy was but short-liv’d,
for by again dipping into the sublime, geometry, and metaphysical
abstractions, he once more lost his senses[36].

Nor is it less laborious to continue our accustom’d studies too long,
when old age approaches. The soul that animates our bodies, is indeed
immortal; but so long as it is connected with a feeble frame, it must be
influenc’d by its nature.

    _Gigni pariter cum corpore, & una_
    _Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem._

    _Besides, ’tis plain, that souls are born and grow,_
    _And all by age decay, as bodies do._

                                             CREECHE’S Lucretius, book 3.

The labours of the mind should therefore be retrench’d, as the declining
powers of the body direct; the latter becomes incapable of bearing the
same burthens, the former of pursuing the same studies, which in this
period of life soonest break the constitution, and destroy the brain; and
are of so little use, that old men consult their glory no less than their
health, by retiring betimes.

    _Solve senescentem mature sanus equum, ne_
    _Peccet ad extremum ridendus, & ilia ducat._

    _Loose from the rapid car your aged horse,_
    _Lest in the race, derided, left behind,_
    _He drag his jaded limbs, and burst his wind._

                                         FRANCIS’S Horace, lib. 1. ep. 1.

But it grieves me, respectable auditors, that you should be obliged to
hear of so many disorders, and I to give an account of them; so I shall
say no more of so melancholy a subject, but proceed to treat of the
remedies for the several diseases.

What lover ever had eyes to see the blemishes of his mistress? What lover
ever ceas’d to admire his mistress’s beauty? This is another pernicious
effect of learning; it occasions a sourness of temper. Philosophers think
themselves wise in every thing; ’tis a difficult matter to persuade them
that they every day injure their health by their manner of living; you
may advise, intreat, and even scold them, it will be all to no purpose;
they impose upon themselves a thousand different ways; some by too great
a confidence in their strength, others by the hopes of impunity from the
punishments being delayed; others again by the deceitful defence of the
power of habit, and others again by the still more deceitful example
of other men’s good luck; others by other motives; and all, by that
steady adherence to their purpose, which they think becoming in a man of
virtue, are so blinded, that they are not affected by future sufferings,
and hardly even by those they have already incurred. I shall not however
neglect my duty as a monitor, and if I should fail of success, it will
be at least some merit to have attempted in a design of so much utility.
Preservatives are to be offered to such of the studious as are still in
health, and remedies to those who have impair’d their constitutions.

The sure and only preservative is for the mind to be often unemploy’d,
and the body to labour. This does not hold with regard to all men of
learning; there are some whose meditations should be disturb’d upon
no account whatever. DESCARTES frames a world, NEWTON revolves the
whole system of the universe in his mind, MONTESQUIEU makes laws for
all nations; let no body interrupt them, let all nature be silent, they
labour for us, let the good of the people be the supreme law; they
were born to cultivate those studies. But how few are there, whose
labours are of such consequence? Most studious men lose their time,
and break their constitutions to no purpose; one makes a collection of
common-place topicks, another embellishes such as are threadbare, a third
anxiously investigates matters of no utility, others make trifles the
subject of laborious researches, and all are equally unmindful of the
unprofitableness and danger of their pursuits. But be vigilant for their
good; knock at their doors; rouse them from their lethargy; make them,
whether they will or no, lay aside their studies for hours together,
and let their minds not be totally abandoned to idleness, but recreated
by gentle ease, whilst their strength is restored by exercise. At the
beginning of my discourse I displayed the advantages of exercise: let it
therefore be observed as an inviolable rule by the learned, to dedicate
an hour or two every day to walking, that the lungs may be recreated
by a free use of the air, that the stagnant humours may be thrown off,
perspiration renewed, the limbs strengthened, and the nerves repaired.
BOERHAAVE chose for this purpose the hour before dinner. Nor is walking
alone sufficient. I would likewise recommend riding, which acts admirably
upon the head and lungs, and above all upon the abdominal viscera, by
repeatedly agitating them; as likewise all the other exercises, which
were carefully cultivated both by the ancients and our ancestors; but
which we, to our great detriment, have neglected. Let us not forget
HERODICUS, a man of learning, endowed with extraordinary intellectual
faculties, but the most infirm of all mortals, who by exercise alone so
confirmed his health, that he lived entirely free from disorders to a
hundred years of age, and composed a treatise upon the gymnastic art.
Let us not forget SOCRATES, the wisest of mankind, who thought it worth
his while to learn this art. STRATO, being troubled with the spleen, had
recourse to exercise, which cured him. HYSMONÆUS, being afflicted with a
weakness of the nerves, had recourse to the olympic games, and by that
exercise overcame the disorder. Sailing should have its share of praise,
amongst other sorts of exercise, whose power in removing the obstructions
of the viscera, throwing off the bile, restoring the lungs, renewing
perspiration, and strengthening the fibres, the ancients were well
acquainted with: and it has lately been demonstrated by the illustrious
GILCHRIST, and was likewise preferred to all other sorts of carriage by
AUGUSTUS CÆSAR, who, when he had any occasion to travel, chose rather
to go by sea than otherwise, if it was possible. AUGUSTUS CÆSAR may in
many respects be compared to the studious and learned; “eloquentiam enim
studiaque liberaliora ab ætate prima & cupide & laboriosissime exercuit;
& graves valetudines per omnem vitam expertus est; & distillationibus,
& rheumaticis doloribus, & calculo obnoxius vixit, & præcordiorum
inflatione aliquoties tentabatur; litteratis vero sapientior;” “for he
cultivated eloquence and the liberal arts from his early youth with taste
and diligence, and was during his whole life a valetudinarian; he was
troubled with catarrhs, rheumatic pains, and the stone, and was sometimes
likewise attacked with an inflammation of the parts about the heart; but,
being more prudent than most men of learning, _he took great care of his
valetudinary constitution_[37].” Riding in an easy chariot is of little
service; of still less the easy succussions of the several machines
which have been invented by modern industry for moving the sick about in
their chambers; but I set a high value upon all those plays or diversions
which oblige a man to exercise both his arms; such, for example, are
shuttle-cock, and others of the like nature.

Do not be concerned, my worthy auditors; the time which you devote to
recreation is not lost to learning; you will presently apply to your
studies with renewed alacrity, and, whilst your strength and health are
preserved, a long life will abundantly recompense the hours dedicated
to the care of the body. In leisure likewise those sublime ideas may
rise, which the obscurity of your musæum would for ever have suppressed,
_for lively and vigorous geniuses make the more noble efforts, the more
intervals of leisure they allow themselves_[38]. I have a particular
friend, who, in his walks in the country, has composed books that will
immortalize his name; _for the souls of those who walk under the canopy
of heaven are exalted_: and PLINY the younger observes, _that it is
surprizing to what a degree the soul is rous’d by the agitation and
motion of the body_: close confinement contracts the body, the oil of the
lamp, as it were, infects the thoughts by its smell, and by too intense
study we become incapable of application. PLUTARCH has an ingenious
observation, that as plants are nourished by moderate watering, but
overwhelmed by too much, so the soul is improved by moderate studies,
but overpowered by excessive studies[39]. Take my advice therefore, you
men of learning; you will one day repent your austere retirement; but it
will be too late to look for a remedy when the danger is at hand; and
foresight becomes the wise man: don’t think to excuse your dangerous
errors; the experiment is not made upon a vulgar soul, the life of a man
of learning is at stake; neither alledge, in excuse for yourselves, the
examples of others; nor your own strength, which you break every day;
nor vain custom, for we can never use ourselves to a disease; nor the
impunity of your early years, for reiterated strokes will break what one
alone could not. Lay aside, therefore, the agitations of your minds, and
exercise your bodies; for exercise is of so much service to the mind,
that HOFFMAN[40] has by its means made stupid men attain to a degree
of understanding; and do not despise the health of the body, with the
assistance of which the labour of the mind will become more supportable;
for the powers of the mind grow dull, if the strength of the body is
in a wavering unsettled state. Physicians have power over souls; and
DESCARTES has justly observed, “Animum adeo a temperamento & organorum
corporis dispositione pendere, ut si ratio aliqua possit inveniri,
quæ homines sapientiores & ingeniosiores reddat quam hactenus fuerit,
credendum sit illam in medicina quæri debere.” “That the soul depends
so much upon the constitution and disposition of the corporeal organs,
that, if there could be a method found to render men wise and ingenious,
it seems probable that it should be sought in physick[41].” There is a
regimen calculated for the studious, of which I shall now give a succinct
account[42].

HIPPOCRATES in three words expresses the whole alimentary diet of all
ages, all ranks of men, and all conditions, ὡς ὁ πονος εστι και ἡ τροφη,
food should be as labour; for, as he says elsewhere, if the aliments
are overcome, that is, if they are subdued by the powers of the body,
they invigorate it; if they overcome it, that is, when they get the
better of the digestive powers, they give rise to many bad effects: and
PLUTARCH justly observes from HIPPOCRATES, that health arises from the
exact equality of bodily exercise and the aliments taken. The reason is,
the body by its own force makes its own juices and humours out of the
aliments it uses: nor is its state the same in the robust ploughman and
enfeebled doctor. Whilst the former, by incessant exercise, by breathing
every day the wholesome country air, by a chearful and vacant mind,
unembarrassed by perplexing meditations, and by soft slumbers continually
repairs his strength, he can bear any sort of food; the salival, gastric,
intestinal, and bilious liquors, elaborated to the highest perfection,
thoroughly dissolve the most glutinous fat, and even salt pork hardened
by smoke; the strength of the muscles of the stomach and intestines
is unimpaired; they suffer nothing to stay beyond its time in their
cavities; and as the aliments are digested, their remains are thrown out.
How different from this is the case of the man debilitated by study! The
hard bowels of the mower can digest any thing, the soft viscera of the
learned or indolent are incapable of digestion; the latter therefore
should maturely deliberate, what his powers are equal to, and what not.

Give the labouring man thin broth, small cabbage, jellies, pullet’s
flesh, or white bread; the force of the viscera and constant labour will
soon digest these, he will immediately grow hungry, sweat all over, and
in a short time his strength will fail him, if it be not soon repaired
with fat bacon, hard cheese, and black bread. But let this food, or food
of the like nature, be eaten by the weak inhabitants of cities, who are
unequal to the labour of digesting it, dreadful diseases will soon arise
from thence, the aliments being converted into poison. These are golden
words of BOERHAAVE: “Eruditi viri (inquit) nolunt gulæ temperare, &
audent eadem edere quæ rustici, verum non ferunt hunc victum; optent, aut
feriari a studiis, aut a duris cibis.” “Men of learning, says he, will
not live temperately; but are so indiscreet as to eat the same food that
labouring men do, and which they are not able to bear; so they should
wish either to be exempted from the necessity of studying, or from that
of eating strong food[43],” which if they continue to live upon, there
arise obstinate obstructions in the abdominal viscera.

The strength of the aliments is estimated not by the nature of the food
alone, but by its quantity: it is not therefore enough to be choice in
the quality; attention should likewise be given to the quantity of the
food. I will assert with confidence, that an error in either respect
is attended with very bad consequences; but it is worst of all when it
relates to the quantity. A due observation of the bodies of learned men
will shew what aliments should be chosen, and what avoided: to enumerate
all the various sorts would be tedious and disagreeable; it will be
sufficient to mention the principal kinds.

All fat, viscid aliments, all aliments puffed with wind, or hardened
either by art or nature, are hurtful. The ancients condemned all sorts
of pulse; and PYTHAGORAS strictly forbid his disciples to eat beans,
as these have an extraordinary flatulency, highly destructive of the
tranquillity of mind necessary to one who investigates truth. Every body
knows, that whilst the stomach swells the mind is depressed with languor,
and becomes incapable of performing its functions. The tender flesh of
all young animals is of great service, except those of swine and geese;
not when boiled in copious broth, for then they are deprived of their
nutritious juices, but when roasted, or boiled in a small quantity of
water. Such roots are wholesome as consist of a light flour, not without
a mixture of salt or sugar[44]; soft herbs, which are neither too acid
nor too emollient. Nor should the several sorts of seeds be denied
their praise; nor ripe fruit, concerning the use of which, however, a
caution should be observed; for they relax, dissolve, cause acidity,
and thereby are the less fit for studious men. But take notice, amongst
the most severe disorders of the learned are reckoned the stagnation,
the thickening, and the hardening of the bile, which defeats are best
remedied by fruits that swell with saponaceous juices, as cherries,
strawberries, rasberries, gooseberries, peaches, grapes, pears, and other
fruits of the like nature, which studious, sedentary men cannot well do
without, especially in summer. Care should be taken to prevent their
being detrimental, by eating them when the stomach is empty, either with
or without bread, and long before and long after having drunk wine; for
thus they neither disturb the digestion of the other aliments, nor, being
hardened with wine, prove more difficult of digestion themselves, nor are
turned into a sourness, but act like a mild and gently stimulating soap,
resolve concretions, accelerate the course of the bile, stimulate the
sluggish intestines, and, by removing obstinate costiveness, put an end
to grievous disorders, and either prevent hypochondriac melancholy, with
the matter from whence it arises, or cure it. They are of great service
to those, whom severe study throws into inflammatory disorders, or slow
fevers, proceeding from a drying up of the humours: but they are hurtful
when, the strength being broken, the fibres have lost their tone, and the
fluids are too thin. Eggs boiled in such a manner as to be supped are
also very good for them; for these, being inspissated by boiling, mix
with the harder aliments. Well-baked bread and decoctions of bread are
also of service to them. Milk is wholesome, provided it does not grow
acid in the stomach. Chocolate deserves to be recommended; for with its
soft flour and penetrating oil, and a sort of gentle bitter irritating
taste, it soon repairs and restores the strength: do not, however, use
it to excess; it is a very nutritious aliment, and increases plethora in
those of a plethoric disposition; it is fat, and by too great lubrication
renders the stomach and intestines incapable of being stimulated,
so that neither does the stomach grow hungry, nor are the excrements
voided: it moreover grows acid, and causes a gnawing of the stomach.
Various dishes, which may be made out of these by a judicious and prudent
mixture, are very wholesome; but it is better to use only simple food,
either raw or boiled.

    _Accipe nunc, victus tenuis quæ quantaque secum,_
    _Afferat. Imprimis valeas bene nam variæ res,_
    _Ut noceant homini, credas, memor illius escæ,_
    _Quæ simplex olim tibi sederit, at simul assis_
    _Miscueris elixa, simul conchylia turdis,_
    _Dulcia se in bilem vertent, stomachoque tumultum_
    _Lenta feret pituita._

    _————Now mark what blessings flow_
    _From frugal meals: and first they can bestow_
    _That prime of blessings, health; for you’ll confess_
    _That various meats the stomach must oppress,_
    _If you reflect how light, how well you were,_
    _When plain and simple was the chearful fare;_
    _But roast and boil’d when you promiscuous eat,_
    _When fowl and shell-fish in confusion meet,_
    _Sweets, turn’d to choler, with cold phlegm engage,_
    _And in the stomach civil warfare wage._

                                        FRANCIS’S Horace, lib. 2. sat. 2.

Relaxed fibres, quite benumbed by a sedentary life, sometimes require a
gentle stimulus; therefore a mild seasoning is not to be disapproved of,
as salt, sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg; and such agreeable aromaticks of our
own country as every man cultivates in his garden, thyme, sweet-marjoram,
fennil, chervil, and others of the like nature: but those are to be
avoided which stimulate with a sharp salt or oil, that nature can
scarcely overcome. I hate garlick as much as HORACE himself; nor do I
better like pepper and mustard, which are pernicious for their parching
oils: but I advise you, however, not to make an immoderate use of the
milder sort of seasonings, but use them as remedies, and not for a
constancy; for their frequent irritation increases frictions, wastes the
fibres, and shortens life.

There are other helps to digestion, and the chief of these is exact
mastication, which greatly forwards the work of the stomach: this is
highly recommended by physicians; but slighted by others very foolishly,
and greatly to their own prejudice. It both increases the secretion of
the saliva, which is the best menstruum of the aliments, and, whilst it
divides the latter into minute particles, it increases their superficies,
whence they are more easily penetrated by the gastric juices;
consequently there is a quicker digestion, a more compleat solution, no
spontaneous corruption, no irritating of the stomach. Therefore let not
the learned despise mastication, or rather not forget it, whilst at their
meals they are, by a pernicious habit, intent upon other things: whether
they read or meditate, the stomach suffers, because the nerves languish
when the mind thinks attentively, and experience proves to the very eyes
themselves, that digestion is badly performed when the nerves languish;
for upon binding the nerves of the stomach, the illustrious HALLER, who
made so many extraordinary discoveries, often saw the aliments totally
corrupted, instead of being digested.

Digestion is performed slowly in men of learning, therefore fresh
aliments should seldom be given them; because the state of the stomach
is very different when it is half full of undigested aliments, from what
it is when entirely void of aliments, and overflowed with the gastric
fluids, ready for the use of concoction. Therefore to make three meals
a day, one somewhat considerable, the other two rather slight, will
be sufficient for men of learning. The following order with regard to
eating, or rather living, pleases me highly, and is recommended by the
experience of numbers: Upon rising in the morning a studious person
should drink a glass of pure water; in about an hour after he should
breakfast; six hours after he should dine, having first past one hour
in walking; after dinner he should allow himself an hour or two of
leisure, because to sit down to study immediately after eating is highly
pernicious: his supper should be light; for this, there are reasons of
the greatest weight, because, as I observed before, sleep occasions a
dangerous plethora in the head; therefore the fullness of the vessels
should not be increased before sleep by too large a meal[45]: add to
this, that the functions of the nerves are suspended during the time of
sleep, and they cannot perform digestion; at last a soft and refreshing
slumber is produced by the absence of all irritation: but if the stomach
is overloaded with aliments, the sleep is interrupted, as the nerves are
continually affected by the irritation of digestion. Hence a plentiful
supper causes a heaviness in the head, sleep is disturbed, digestion
interrupted, the strength impaired, and the health entirely destroyed.
But a Platonic supper is praised, because it is not only agreeable at
the time, but the day following.

              _Nam corpus onustum_
    _Hesternis vitiis animum quoque prægravat una,_
    _Atque affigit humo divinæ particulam auræ._
    _Alter, ubi dicto citius curata sopori_
    _Membra dedit, vegetus præscripta ad munia surgit._

    _The body too, with yesterday’s excess_
    _Burthen’d and tir’d, shall the pure soul depress;_
    _Weigh down this portion of celestial birth,_
    _This breath of God, and fix it to the earth._
    _Who down to sleep from a short supper lies,_
    _Can to the next day’s business vigorous rise._

                                        FRANCIS’S Horace, lib. 2. sat. 2.

Most learned professors, you well know him, whom as a colleague you all
loved, that eminent man, who, when he had broke his constitution by a
profound study of antiquities, history, and both the civil and common
law, restored it considerably by the simple remedy of supping upon milk.

Not to sup at all, however, is dangerous; for the nerves of the learned
are moveable, and easily irritated; and if the chyle is not soon renewed
by a supply of new aliments, such is the acrimony of the blood, already
often subdued by the strength of the viscera, that it is an irritation of
the nerves, which totally destroys the sleep. The example of AUGUSTUS
CÆSAR, who was very moderate in eating, is very properly proposed to
the learned, as is likewise that of the illustrious LEWIS CORNARO, who
restored his ruined health by a regular diet alone; and eating but the
fourth part of the quantity of victuals eaten by his fellow-citizens,
lived to an advanced age, vigorous and chearful. Long since BARTHOLUS,
one of the most eminent lawyers, and a man well versed in polite
literature, reduced the quantity of his food and liquor to a certain
weight, and by that means preserved his intellectual faculties unimpaired
during the whole course of his life[46]. A regular diet is capable of
effecting every thing: studious men, however, whilst they take care of
their health, ought not to forget, that a man, who is well, should not so
confine himself to rules, as not to break through them, when he thinks
proper: for a constant habit is real slavery: and I have known several
learned and studious men, who were so scrupulous with regard to their
hours of eating and going to bed, that their minds seemed to be chained
to their bodies, which is the most shameful sort of servitude: nor can he
be said to be either a lover of virtue or of learning, who cannot pursue
his studies if he be obliged to wait a little longer than usual for his
meals, if he has not slept quite enough, or if the air be too hot or too
cold.

I have hitherto spoke only of solid food; liquors are not to be
forgotten. In the last age a grievous error crept into physic, that
health is the better, the more fluid the blood is; and by the advice of
BONTEKOE chiefly a pernicious custom prevailed of drinking warm liquors
both night and day, whereby the human species has greatly suffered, and
those of the present age sorely lament the injury which their forefathers
sustained in the last, by impairing the strength of their nerves.

Grave authors, who knew better, and chiefly the illustrious DUNCAN, with
BOERHAAVE, and the whole school of Leyden, have proscribed this error;
and, if they have not reformed the abuse, have at least greatly checked
it. But most valetudinarians still lie under the same prepossession,
and, looking upon an over thick blood as the source of their disorders,
have recourse to warm beverages, which others reject. It can scarce be
told, it can scarce be believed, how many disorders proceed from this
source: and I will take upon me to assert, that those pernicious bowls,
overflowing with warm liquors, are the true box of Pandora, without
even hope remaining at the bottom; for they are prolific sources of
hypochondriac melancholy, which both adds strength to and is itself one
of the worst of disorders. Nor is it to be wondered at, if warm beverages
are more hurtful to studious men, who are naturally weak and feeble,
than to others; for they are not troubled with an over thick, but, on
the contrary, with too thin a blood. You are well aware, respectable
auditors, that the density of the blood is as the motion of the solids:
the fibres of the learned are relaxed, their motions are slow, and
their blood of consequence thin. Bleed a ploughman and a doctor at the
same time: from the first there will flow a thick blood, resembling
inflammatory blood, almost solid, and of a deep red; the blood of the
second will be either of a faint red, or without any colour, soft,
gelatinous, and will almost entirely turn to water. Your blood therefore,
men of learning, should not be dissolved, but brought to a consistence;
and you should in general be moderate in the article of drinking, and
cautiously avoid warm liquors.

The blood flows with difficulty in weak persons, stagnates, obstructs,
not on account of its own density, but by the feeble contraction of the
vessels, which is increased by hard drinking. The stomach first feels
the disorder; because the liquors prepared by nature for the business of
digestion, being immersed in the liquors that are drank, become unable
to perform their functions, and the food is imperfectly dissolved on
account of the imperfection of the menstruums. The fibres of the stomach,
being too much stretched, at first give pain, and soon after lose their
force, and become unable to push forward the aliments: they therefore
load the stomach by being stopped: to cure which the sick persons again
have recourse to drinking, which with the force of a torrent drives
these half-digested aliments to the intestines. All these symptoms grow
worse if warm beverages are drank; for this is the force of heat, it
both relaxes the fibres, and, by more powerfully dissolving the phlegm,
occasions more severe pains in the stomach.

Amongst the favourite beverages of the learned, the worst is the infusion
of that famous leaf, so well known by the name of tea, which, to our
great detriment, has every year, for these two centuries past, been
constantly imported from China and Japan. This most pernicious gift first
destroys the strength of the stomach, and, if it be not soon laid aside,
equally destroys that of the viscera, the blood, the nerves; and of the
whole body; so that malignant and all chronical disorders will appear to
increase, especially nervous disorders, in proportion as the use of tea
becomes common: and you may easily form a judgment from the diseases that
prevail in every country, whether the inhabitants of it are lovers of
tea, or the contrary. How happy would it be for Europe, if by unanimous
consent the importation of this infamous leaf were prohibited, which is
endued only with a corrosive force, derived from the acrimony of the gum
with which it is pregnant: for experience shews, that what it has of an
astringent principle is lost in the warm water.

I will not pass the same censure, though I must pass some censure, upon
that celebrated beverage coffee, which both hurts by the power of the
warm water, and by irritating; for nature cannot use itself to irritation
without suffering. It is however rendered powerful by a nutritious flour,
and by a bitter and strengthening aromatic oil; so that it may well be
laid up in apothecaries shops as an useful remedy, but is improperly
used in kitchens as part of our daily food. It raises the spirits,
eases the stomach when loaded with phlegm, cures the head-ach, causes a
chearfulness of mind, and, if we may believe some people, increases its
penetration; for which reason the learned are so fond of it. But was
coffee used by HOMER, THUCIDIDES, PLATO, XENOPHON, LUCRETIUS, VIRGIL,
OVID, HORACE, PETRONIUS, and the other great men of antiquity, who
as much excelled us in genius, as we surpass them in experience and
knowledge of nature.

Warm liquors being therefore justly set aside, cold water should be used,
which has as much power in strengthening as the former in weakening the
body.

Wine deserves its share of praise; but I have the same opinion concerning
wine, with respect to the learned, that I have in regard to coffee, that
it should be used as a remedy, and not as a drink. The Creator gave pure
water as the universal drink, which he made a menstruum to all sorts of
food, and agreeable to all palates: it should be chosen cold, soft, and
mild; for it both strengthens and cleanses the viscera. Hence it has
been generally looked upon as a panacea both by the Greeks and Romans,
and it is the best of remedies when dryness prevails, or bile or acidity
are in too great quantity[47]. Digestion will be more easy, sleep
sweeter, the head seldomer clouded, and the strength greater, if, laying
aside wine, we quench our thirst with pure water alone.

Wine has one fault that renders it exceeding hurtful to the learned; it
forces the blood into the brain, and increases the several disorders
thereof, head-achs, megrim, and the like, which are hardly to be cured
without laying aside the use of wine: all these disorders are wonderfully
removed by drinking water, which prevents too great a quantity of blood
from being gathered in the head. What wonder is it then if it increases
the intellectual powers, and if those who drink water alone have a more
tenacious memory, a more lively imagination, and quicker perceptions than
others. The abstemiousness of DEMOSTHENES is a great example in favour of
drinking water, which has likewise this virtue, it in a surprising manner
subdues those catarrhs with which the learned are so often troubled,
and which the use of wine is apt to increase. They have often acid
eructations; but wine sharpens an acidity, water dulls it.

I will solemnly own, that I have cured more nervous disorders, (and
learned men are generally troubled with such) by retrenching the
quantity of liquor, forbidding all warm beverages, as well as wine, and
recommending exercise, than by any other remedies. Nor should the danger
of leaving off what people have been used to, be alledged: there is no
such danger; or, if there be, it is easily avoided by a gradual disuse.

But take notice, if sometimes the too great laxity of the stomach, the
great weakness of the body, and the depression of the spirits, require
a remedy to brace, to strengthen, to excite, to exhilarate; wine is the
most proper. In vain would you seek a more expeditious and agreeable
medicine than this through the three kingdoms of nature: but let it be
generous and smooth, and such as may vie with Falernian wine:

    _Quod curas abigat, quod cum spe divite manet_
    _In venas, animumque meum, quod verba ministret._

    _My wines of generous and of smoother kind,_
    _To drive away my cares, and to the soul,_
    _Through the full veins, with golden hopes to roll._
    _With flowing language to inspire my tongue,_
    _And make the list’ning fair one think me young._

                                           FRANCIS’S Hor. lib. 1. ep. 15.

But avoid those small wines which have less of the nature of wine than
vinegar, and rather irritate than strengthen. Remember that wine is an
antidote against the miseries of life and the tediousness of idleness;
cares are banished by wine, whilst the reason is intoxicated: but does
such a drink become the learned? And this puts me in mind of another sort
of intoxication, I mean that caused by smoking tobacco, which abounds
with an acrimonious salt and sulphur, together with a narcotic oil. I
have elsewhere enlarged upon the folly of smoking; here I shall add
more concisely, that the narcotic principle hurts the stomach, causes
a stuffing up of the head, head-achs, vertigos, anxiety, lethargy,
apoplexy, and finally all the effects of opium, as the great Lord BACON
has observed. _Tobacco_, says he, _the use of which herb has greatly
prevailed in the present age, is a species of henbane; it is evident
that it disturbs the head like opiates_. Therefore, young men, avoid a
dirty pleasure, equally injurious both to your health and your studies,
and which should be left to those who have recourse to it for the
killing of time. The muses fly those studies that smell like a stable,
and delight in a purer air; for one of the chief sources of health or
sickness is the air which environs us, in which we live, and by which not
only our bodies are affected, but whose power our very minds experience.
Thus the air of Bœotia, or Thrace, rendered dull those whom that of
Athens revived:

    _Bœotum in crasso jurares ære natum_[48].

    _Take him to books and poetry, you’ll swear_
    _This king was born in thick Bœotian air._

                                            FRANCIS’S Hor. lib. 2. ep. 1.

Prudent men will chuse as pure, as warm, and as dry an air as they can;
for such an one, by giving strength to the fibres, is salubrious to the
lungs, and promotes the circulation. A frigid and dry air is supportable:
a moist air is highly pernicious, as by it all the disorders of studious
men are aggravated; for it increases laxity, stops perspiration, and
occasions catarrhs, pains, and palsies. Every man of learning has it
not in his power to repair to Baya or Alexandria, nor does it suit them
all to breathe the country air, which is the purest; for there are more
that compile than think. The country is not a proper place to pursue such
studies; but any man may chuse a healthy habitation in town, and live in
a lightsome house, a high apartment, refreshed by a breeze in summer,
and enlightened by the sun in winter. He should take particular care to
have fresh air let into his chamber every day; without this precaution he
lives upon the infected: it should be cooled in summer, and not kept too
warm in winter; for the learned, like all weak men, as was the case of
AUGUSTUS, are ill able to bear excess of heat or cold: too great a heat
relaxes the nerves, but intense cold causes convulsions. In the dog-days
we become unfit for labour, as also in the severe cold of winter; and
the more tender the constitution, the less it is able to withstand the
weather. Such was that of MILTON, whose nerves were relaxed to such a
degree in the heat of summer, that he[49] was almost reduced to a state
of imbecillity. But the air should be warmed in winter, a fire being
kindled for the purpose; for this fresh air succeeds the corrupt air that
goes off; nor do exhalations remain, nor does the head grow warm, nor do
the feet become cold, which is of great consequence. Cold in the feet
hurts the weak by causing pains in the head, the throat, and the breast;
it disorders digestion, causes dreadful colicks, obstructs perspiration,
and prevents sleep to a very great degree. I have often cured men of
note, who had long been without sleep, though they had recourse to the
most efficacious remedies, by advising them to warm the soles of their
feet at a fire, every night before they went to bed, till the sense
of heat became painful. Others have been greatly relieved by a gently
stimulating plaster applied to the soles of their feet, and left on both
night and day.

I may probably, respectable auditors, appear to descend too much to
particulars, and to dwell too long upon trifles; but nothing is little
or inconsiderable in physick: and it is a thing of so much importance
to keep the blood from the heads of men of learning, that they should
neglect nothing which may contribute to this end. They should therefore
take care not to keep it warm with too much covering, or rather they
should use themselves to go bare-headed from their childhood. Some men
of learning have been so bold as to wrap their heads with a towel dipt
in cold water, that they might be able to continue the longer at their
studies: and what will not an inordinate desire of knowledge excite men
to? Such rashness should be avoided; but it is of service to all, and
especially to studious, sedentary men, to wash their ears, their faces,
and their whole heads, hair and all, every morning in cold water. It is
very good for the _literati_, when they feel the blood forced up into
their heads, not to walk, or inquire sollicitously after medicines, but
to sit upon their chair in total inaction, without ever uttering a word.

The same necessity of keeping the blood from the head should prevent
the learned from indulging in sleep after dinner; or, if they should
sometimes be forced to yield to sleep, let them imitate the illustrious
personage, so often mentioned already, AUGUSTUS CÆSAR, _who with the
cloaths and shoes he had on took a short nap, having covered his eyes
with his hand_[50]. I must likewise add this caution, that they should
never compose themselves to sleep, without first unbinding all their
ligatures. To wash their feet in warm water is likewise of great service
to them.

These are the chief helps by the assistance of which the learned will be
enabled to prevent the ill effects of study; but when their application
has produced real disorders, they will have occasion for other remedies.
You will sometimes see them, when nature is quite exhausted by study,
fall into a consumption: then the severity of the disorder requires
some efficacious remedy; and the best is entirely to lay aside study,
meditation, and books, to bid a long farewell to their musæums, and,
giving themselves up to leisure, chearfulness, and country pleasures,
to think of restoring their bodies alone, without troubling their heads
about cultivating their minds; but let them become what men were designed
for by nature, ploughmen or gardeners.

    _Difficile est longum subito deponere amorem,_
    _Difficile est: verum hoc, qua lubet, efficias._
    _Una salus hæc est, hoc est tibi pervincendum._

                                                              CATULL. 82.

    _It is a difficult matter to divest one’s self suddenly of a
    passion of a long standing: but this you may effect, if you
    desire it. This is the only thing that can preserve you, this
    you must endeavour to bring about at any rate._

How sure should we be of curing the disorders of men of learning, if it
were possible to lull thought asleep. Here generous wines are of great
service, provided the lungs are still unaffected, and a slow heat does
not burn up the veins. Wholesome meats, and well boiled aliments, are of
great service: milk is likewise of great service, provided the stomach
is able to bear it. Riding is also useful. And it may be beneficial to
purge away the peccant matter by some gentle, strengthening remedy. BACON
recommends rhubarb. CELSUS, with more reason as I apprehend, recommended
aloes, the use of which is of great service to the learned. Let them not,
however, abuse an excellent remedy; for, though purges are sometimes
necessary, they are dangerous when too frequently used: for the body
begins to be disused to nourishment, and must of consequence grow weak.
But beware, you sick men, of too violent purging remedies; because, as
the intestines are often covered with mucus, this mucus is generally
soft, and easily removed; when it is removed, a softer sort succeeds in
its place; this badly defends the villous coat of the intestines; and,
when it is left without defence, it either occasions incessant pains, or
should be continually fomented by the tenderest sort of food.

The Peruvian bark or kinkina is here of the greatest efficacy imaginable;
in this case there is not a better remedy; it restores digestion,
strengthens the vessels, compresses the fluids, promotes secretions, and,
above all, perspiration, repairs the strength of the nerves, and quells
false motions. One of our most eminent geometricians soon repaired his
wasted powers by a large draught of the decoction of kinkina, which he
had constantly by his side.

If the constitution be not yet entirely broke, weakness oppresses the
stomach and the nerves, the learned are troubled with hysteric symptoms,
often attended with a vertigo, fainting fits, suffocation, and anxiety.
They are to be cured like women who are troubled with hysterics,
occasioned by mobility and want of tone in the fibres; they are to be
cured, I say, by bitters, ferulacious gums, myrrh, steel, and the cold
bath. The frequent use of the latter preserves a good state of health,
and repairs a broken constitution; for it is efficacious above all other
remedies, except there be already an extraordinary degree of weakness, in
strengthening the stomach, the nerves, and the whole body; it restores
sleep, produces a chearfulness and serenity of mind, and supplies new
strength to pursue new studies. This made the ancients set so high a
value upon it, that, even amidst the avocations of their necessary
business, they never failed to bathe every day: and I most earnestly
recommend to the literati the frequent use of bathing. I am not ignorant
that the ancients often used the warm bath, but they used it as a remedy
after exercise or fatigue; and it generally agrees very well with the
robust and active; but they restored their strength with cold baths.
AUGUSTUS, who received no benefit from the warm bath, when affected with
great weakness of body, was advised to have recourse to the cold bath by
ANTONIUS MUSA. Cold baths are salutary to delicate constitutions, and the
health of the learned is generally, though not always, as much hurt by
bathing in warm water, as promoted by bathing in cold.

Friction in a great measure produces the same effects with bathing; for
if the whole lower belly of a person, whilst he lies supine in bed in
the morning, with bent knees and an empty stomach, be rubbed all over
with a rough cloth, he will be greatly benefited by it: by this artifice
the motion in the abdomen is increased, the stagnant juices are thrown
out, the secretions are increased, the excrements are prevented from
staying too long in the body, and innumerable diseases are cured, which,
as you have been frequently told, are caused by a slow circulation. If
the skin is rubbed all over, either with a cloth or a flesh-brush, the
cuticular secretion is greatly promoted, the circulation of the blood is
so quickened, that a violent fever may be caused by rubbing alone, the
motion is increased in the smallest vessels, the strength is repaired,
and the ills caused by want of exercise are partly remedied. The ancients
were therefore right in setting a great value upon friction: it was
afterwards unhappily neglected; but the English physicians revived it
with great success; and there is no class of men to whom it may be of
greater service than to the studious. I would, however, recommend to
them not to use this kind of exercise till they have read what CELSUS and
GALEN have written concerning it.

There is another sort of remedy, which is often of the highest service
to men of learning, I mean chalybeate waters; but they should not send
for them, they should go where they are to be drunk at the fountain
head. I do not indeed despise those that are sent for; nay, I have known
men of learning who, by my advice, drank Seltzer waters at home during
the whole year, by which, and remitting somewhat of their application,
they recovered their health. But it is still better to drink them at
their source, for they are there in greater perfection; and the journey
is of service, because, whilst it lasts, the sick are exempt from all
domestick cares, are amused with a variety of objects, enjoy agreeable
company, relax their minds, and recreate their bodies: and the journey
alone is of so much service, that hypochondriac persons are often cured
by visiting remote libraries.

It would be as useless as it is impossible to enumerate all the waters
that may be of service in repairing broken constitutions; for what nature
intended as a most salutary remedy, it has liberally bestowed upon most
regions. There are many in Switzerland; those of Aquia in Savoy, in my
neighbourhood, deserve high praises; our waters of Rotula are still
more to be recommended on account of the agreeableness of the place
than their salubrious qualities; we must not forget those of Lausanne,
the virtues of which have been demonstrated to me both by analysis and
frequent observation; but the Seltzer waters surpass them all, at least
in their reputation, if not in their qualities; those of Schwalbach and
Spaw are still more powerful; and the Pyrmont waters are inferior to none.

These are not all, but the principal remedies by which those disorders
may be cured which men of learning bring upon themselves by over great
application: but their disorders are not occasioned by study alone: as
men they are subject to all the disorders of men; and then they should be
treated according to the rules laid down by experience for curing each
disorder. Physicians, however, should never forget, that the patient,
whom they have under their care, is a man of learning, and cannot, of
consequence, have the same strength with which most other men are endued:
as they have relaxed fibres and thin blood, they are not so capable of
bearing phlebotomy: but the intestines are often filled with a collection
of filth, which must be purged off; so that, as the illustrious RAMAZZINI
has long since observed, it is better to have recourse to other
evacuations with them than to bleeding.

Care should be always taken of the head of a learned patient, because it
is easily disturbed, and grows delirious. This is of very bad consequence
in disorders; for peevishness increases, which few learned patients are
without; and, whilst the brain is agitated by a delirium, the necessary
action of the nerves upon the body becomes slow, and so the powers of
nature, which can alone effect a cure, are destroyed.

If the patient was afflicted before with nervous disorders, these soon
cause sufferings of a peculiar sort: the learned, when they are ill,
cannot bear too much light, nor noise, nor a crowd of spectators. I have
often seen, upon the fever’s beginning to cease, new symptoms occur,
which appear to be very bad, but are in fact only nervous.

Men of learning cannot well bear strong and powerful remedies.

Their recovery is always tedious, and it requires extraordinary care: the
strength returns slowly; the faculties of the mind, above all, are long
in a wavering condition; and I have scarce ever known a man of learning
recover out of a disorder, without complaining of his memory’s being
impaired, and a sort of weakness of the head discoverable in the face
itself. Those little consult their own interest, who immediately return
to their studies, and that before their strength is renewed: they prepare
to themselves a sore repentance: the ill consequences are felt by their
heads, their eyes, and their stomachs, which must greatly suffer, if,
whilst they stand in need of the assistance of the nerves, to digest the
remedies they take, the mind should at so improper a time make use of
them. I have often found, that the exercises of the mind so weaken the
sensibility and motion of the stomach and intestines, that the power of
purgatives is entirely counteracted by meditation and constant study.

Learned patients, when just out of a disorder, recover their sleep very
slowly, and it often is not to be recovered without the assistance of
wine, which is of wonderful efficacy in this case, by restoring a due
tone to the stomach, debilitated by warm liquors; firmness to the nerves,
strength to the whole body, and spirits to the dejected mind.

Thus have I laid open the causes of disorders, their symptoms, and the
method of avoiding them: in fine, I have compleated my design to the
best of my power; and you with joy perceive my discourse approaching to a
conclusion, respectable auditors. I am aware, however, that you will not
dismiss me, till I have atoned for a grievous omission; nor do I intend
to disappoint your expectation: I shall therefore now discover the grand
arcanum of the art of preserving health, which I have hitherto concealed:
attend to my words. Chearfulness of temper is the source of health, and
a virtuous life is the source of chearfulness: a good conscience, a mind
pure and clear of all contagion, are the best preservatives of health;
and if the learned were without them, it would be a shame: for of what
use is learning without wisdom?

        _Quid musæ sine moribus_
    _Vanæ proficiant?_

    _Of what service are the muses without the aid of virtue?_

What else is knowledge but to be wise? Were not the learned in former
ages wise? Knowledge alone is of no avail. I have no manner of esteem
for those doctors, who inquire what is virtuous and becoming, entirely
taken up with moral contemplations, and who, though they see good, follow
evil courses. Woe be to them! they will suffer severely for their bad
conduct. Consider the force of the passions: those which affect the mind
agreeably, promote a good state of health; which those of a contrary
nature destroy. But what affects the mind more agreeably than the
remembrance of a life well spent?

    _Omnem crede diem diluxisse supremum._

    _Look upon every day that’s past as the last of your life._

Cruel remorse of conscience, on the other hand, destroys the powers both
of mind and body; because the mind being a prey to grief, such is the
will of the Author of nature, the fibres are relaxed, and both health and
beauty vanish. I cannot without horror recollect the shocking inquietudes
of some men, who, having abused the gifts of God, could not, without
inexpressible terror, see death approach, which renders the Deity more
awful. On the other hand, I cannot without joy revolve in my memory
the happy deaths of some good men, who, as they had passed their whole
lives in the practice of virtue, returned with joy to the Fountain of all
good, having laid aside their terrestrial covering, and crowned a happy
life with a joyful death. How properly does the learned doctor, lately
professor of divinity in this academy, occur to me in this place, who,
after having suffered the cruel torments of a dreadful disease, during
the course of a twelvemonth, with wonderful resolution and patience,
after a few friendly and pious conversations with his wife and children,
whilst he testified his gratitude to me for my care, and expressed his
good wishes, expired with religious composure. And why should I forget
you, learned, dear, and now happy uncle and Mentor, who, having lived
your whole life, whilst in health, as we promise to live when we are ill,
enjoying, to an advanced age, a conscience void of offence, a genius
replete with vigour, and faculties acute and penetrating; not only taught
us how to live virtuously, but likewise have instructed us how to die
well.

But it is time for me to put an end to my wandering discourse; for I am
ashamed to detain you any longer, respectable auditors.

Farewell, therefore, most illustrious president, whose extraordinary
humanity, gentle manners, and uncorrupt integrity, all are unanimous in
praising. How agreeable to me was it to be chosen upon this occasion
by you, whose friendship, having so often experienced, I am so happy
as to experience again. But how can I address you, without at the same
time thinking of that prince whom you represent amongst us with so much
applause; and this remembrance fills me with emotion. For he is the
prince to whom I am indebted for so many favours. It is he who recalled
me, out of love to my country, when I was on the point of quitting it at
the invitation of a great monarch; recalled me, I say; and, remembering
my attachment to physic, founded this professorship, and bestowed it upon
me, not without the most honourable tokens of his benevolence; and, by
enrolling me in your illustrious assembly, learned professors, he enabled
me to address you by the dear appellation of colleagues. Vouchsafe,
therefore, favourably to receive him whom he has given you as a companion
of your labours, and receive me, most honoured colleagues, in the same
disposition of mind with which I come towards you; and shew as much
benevolence, facility, and readiness to assist me, as I am ready to shew
you veneration, obsequiousness, and docility.

Citizens and strangers, illustrious for your great virtues, your
extraordinary intellectual endowments, and the high offices you fill, the
friendship of many of whom I cultivate with pleasure, receive my thanks
for the benevolence with which you have heard me. Finally, I address
myself to you, you studious youth, hope of your country and of the
church, and ornament of the academy; whatever learning or genius I am
possessed of,

    _Et quicquid in arte mea possum promittere curæ_,

    _And whatever assistance I can promise by my art_;

which I am sensible is but small, and I am sorry for it; but, such as it
is, I entirely dedicate and consecrate it to you. It will give me the
highest satisfaction, if it can be of any service to you; but how would
it grieve me, if, by misunderstanding my discourse, you should be hurt
instead of being benefited by it. Take care therefore, virtuous youths;
my design was to shew the dangers of an obstinate perseverance in study;
but I was quite silent with regard to the use of polite learning,
_which[51] nourishes youth, delights old age, adorns prosperity, affords
consolation in adversity, delights at home, is no hindrance abroad,
passes the night with us, travels with us, accompanies us into the
country_. I have proved by examples, how dangerous it is to fatigue the
minds of children with too great labour; but it was not my intention
to banish all labour and study. “Nam certe quamlibet parum sit, quod
contulerit ætas prior, majora tamen aliqua discet puer eo ipso anno,
quo minora didicisset. Hoc per singulos annos prorogatum in summam
proficit: & quantum in infantia præsumptum est temporis, adolescentiæ
acquiritur[52].” “For though what is contributed by the first age of
life is but inconsiderable, a boy will certainly learn some things of
consequence in the very year that he learns trifles. This, increasing
every year, will at last improve him, and what is learned in infancy is
an acquisition to youth.” It is dangerous to break upon the rocks of too
great learning; it is shameful to be wrecked upon the opposite shore.
What path then must you tread? _Hac urget lupus, hac canis angit._ _On
one side the wolf urges, on t’other the dog worries us._ You will be safe
in the middle path, always remembering that sentence of your favourite
HORACE:

    _Est modus in rebus sunt certi denique fines,_
    _Quos ultra citraque nequit consistere rectum._

    _Some certain mean in all things may be found,_
    _To mark our virtue, and our vices bound._

                                        FRANCIS’S Horace, lib. I. sat. I.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Now let those come to themselves who with difficulty admit, that
the aliments are capable of rendering some more temperate, others more
dissolute, some incontinent, some frugal, confident, timorous, mild,
modest, or quarrelsome; let them come to me and hear what it would be
proper for them to eat, and what to drink. They will find from hence a
great assistance in moral philosophy; they will likewise find from hence
a great accession to their intellectual faculties; they will become
more ingenious, have better memories, and be more studious and wise.
For besides the proper sort of food and liquors, I will instruct them
in the nature of air and climates, and point out to them what countries
they should chuse to reside in, what they should avoid. The book which
proves that manners are influenc’d by bodily constitutions, Cap. 9ᵒ.
Charterius, t. 5. p. 457. Observations of the like nature are to be found
in HIPPOCRATES, ARISTOTLE, and PLATO.

[2] Plato’s works, p. 648.

[3] ’Tis an admirable observation of MONTESQUIEU: All things fatigue us
at last, and above all great pleasures; the fibres, that were the organs
of it, stand in need of rest: we must employ others better adapted to
serve us, and thus, as it were, divide our labour. _Essay upon taste._

[4] LORRY _upon melancholy and melancholy disorders_. Tom. I.

[5] VAN SWIETEN’S _Comment. in_ BOERHAVII _aphor._ Tom. III. p. 413.

[6] _Traité du bon chyle_, tom. II. p. 647.

[7] Th. BORDEUX, _prix de l’academie de chir._ tom. VI. p. 199.

[8] Conf. FLEMING _Neuropathia, præf._

[9] _De morbis nervorum_, p. 456.

[10] _Traité des vapeurs hysteriques_, p. 248.

[11] _Epistol. lib. 2. ep. 9._

[12] _Epistol. ad_ HIPPOCRATEM. _Hipp. Fæsii._ tom. II. p. 1288.

[13] _De locis affectis, lib. 5. cap. 6. Charter._ tom. VII. p. 492.

[14] _Medicin. ration. de epilepsia._ § 19.

[15] _Felic._ PLATERI _observat._ p. 28.

[16] VAN SWIETEN, tom. IV. p. 305.

[17] _Gazette de France, Fevr. 25, 1763._

[18] _Epistol. L. 2, ep. 40._ Neither write back to me in prose or in
verse, lest you should bring your health, which is not yet confirm’d,
into new danger; for the spirits will be easily warm’d by attention:
hence blood, hence the habit of body.

[19] _De sedibus & causis morbonum. ep. 3._ § 13.

[20] _Prælect. ad instit._ t. 7. p. 145.

[21] _De sedib. & caus. ep._ 3. §. 17.

[22] HALLERI _Element. Physiologiæ_, t. 4. p. 317.

[23] _De locis affectis_, l. 3. c. 5.

[24] _Ad libellum_ HIPPOCRATIS _de humor_. p. 211.

[25] In studious men, who lead a sedentary life, whilst they grow pale
with poring over books, an apoplexy often arises from such a cause; but
it comes on slowly and gradually. For the first symptom is languor, and a
love of indolence; then the understanding begins to grow dull, the memory
to flag; they become sleepy, stupid, and often continue a long time in
that state before their death. I have seen, and not without the greatest
compassion, men of the most profound learning, and who had deserv’d
highly of the republick of letters, who, as it were, surviv’d themselves
above a twelvemonth in a state of total oblivion, and at last died of
apoplexy. VAN SWIETEN, tom. III. p. 263.

[26] ADAM _vitæ medicorum_, p. 372.

[27] We meet in the medicinal diary with an account, very well worth
reading, of a severe colick, attended with other bad symptoms, and
occasion’d by intense study and nocturnal lucubrations. Tom. I. p. 352.

[28] VAN SWIETEN, tom. III. p. 87. ex COLUMBO.

[29] Experience shews us that men of learning, though naturally of a
chearful disposition, become at last fix’d, silent, pale, emaciated,
and strangely troubled with the hypochondriac disorder, which generally
tyrannizes over sedentary people. _Ant._ FELICI _dissertazioni
epistolari_, p. 203.

[30] BOERHAAV. _ad institut._ §. 896, tom. VII. p. 275.

[31] LANCISUS _de mortu subit._ l. 1. c. 22.

[32] MARKII _Oratio funebris in obitum_ TRIGLANDII. Leyden, 1705.

[33] The famous ROUSSEAU; but he has since quitted the British asylum,
and returned to France.

[34] JOH. ALPH. ROSSET, theologiæ professor, & academiæ, hoc tempore,
rector.

[35] The disorders of orators and singers are the same; but the bodies of
these being open’d, have often shewn inflammations, suppurations, ulcers
in the lungs; nay, the illustrious MORGAGNI saw a young man that had an
excellent voice, whose wind-pipe and throat being affected, could swallow
nothing, and, whilst he attempted to suck down the yolk of an egg, was
suffocated and died. _De sedib. & caus._ tom. 1. p. 228.

[36] It often proves hurtful to men of learning themselves, when in an
advanc’d age they pursue a new study; for this gives rise to a new order
of ideas, which receives no assistance from all the traces before left
upon the brain: new fibres must receive new motions, a laborious work to
the organ already debilitated, and which often throws men of first-rate
capacities into lingering disorders.

[37] SUETONIUS _in vita_ OCT. AUG. _cap._ 82.

[38] VALERIUS MAXIMUS, lib. 3. c. 6. p. 140.

[39] _De education. pueror._ cap. 12.

[40] _De motu opt. corpor. medicin._ § 9.

[41] _De methodo_, _No. 6_: There is likewise a remarkable passage in
MOSES MAIMONIDES, one of the most ancient of the Arabian physicians. As
life and health, says he, contribute greatly to the worship and knowledge
of God; but a man in an ill state of health is unable to contemplate the
works of God as he should do; a man ought to take particular care to
avoid whatever is hurtful to his body, and should endeavour to procure
whatever contributes to keep the body in health and strengthen it. _De
sanit. tuend. init._

[42] It must be acknowledged, that a man of learning, indefatigable in
his studies, if he observes an exact regimen, innocent and moderate, will
find the disadvantages attending his way of life more supportable than
another. FELICI _dissertazioni_, p. 203.

[43] _Prælect. in instit._ § 1036, tom. VII. p. 337.

[44] Many plants fit for use, and perhaps most such, and many others, by
means of an easy art, give out a great quantity of excellent sugar, not
much inferior to that of sugar-canes. Eight ounces of the fresh juice of
the skirret yield an ounce of the best sugar. MARGRAFF _Mem. de l’Acad.
de Berlin_.

[45] Many phænomena prove this plethora; and it is evinced by a simple
observation, and one that occurs daily, _viz._ by those convulsions of
the lower jaw-bone which cause a collision of the teeth in sleep, and
that more strongly in boys when they have eat a hearty supper.

[46] It was justly observed by THEOPHRASTUS, that to eat much, and to
live upon flesh, deprives men of the use of their reason, blunts the
faculties of their minds, and renders them dull and stupid.

[47] BOERHAAVE _prælect._ tom. VII. p. 340.

[48] The goddess, says PLATO, chose a place which was to give birth to
the wisest men. _Init. Timæi._ And do not forget this with regard to
places, that they are of great consequence in giving birth to men of
superior genius, or the reverse. _De leg._ lib. 5.

[49] By the excessive heat, which is not so much as allayed by an Etesian
gale, I have entirely lost the power of philosophising, and am deterred
from writing. LANCISI _ad_ COCCHI, p. 47.

[50] _Qui ita ut vestitus calceatusque erat, retectis pedibus, paulisper
conquiescebat opposita ad oculos manu._ SUETONIUS _in vit. C. O. Aug._
cap. 82. I enlarged upon the ill consequences of sleeping after dinner,
in an epistle which I inscribed a few years ago to the illustrious HALLER.

[51] _Adolescentiam alunt, senectutem oblectant, secundas res ornant,
adversis solatium prebent, delectant domi, non impediunt foris,
pernoctant nobiscum, peregrinantur, rusticantur._ CICERO _Oratione pro
Archiâ_.

[52] QUINTILIANUS _de Instit. Orator, lib. i. cap. i._


FINIS.




MEDICAL BOOKS printed for E. and C. DILLY, in the Poultry, London.


I. Experimental Essays on the following Subjects: 1. On the External
Application of Antiseptics in Putrid Diseases. 2. On the Doses and
Effects of Medicines. 3. On Diuretics and Sudorifics. By William
Alexander, Surgeon in Edinburgh. Price 3s. 6d. in Boards.

II. An Essay on Fevers; more particularly those of the Common, Continued,
and Inflammatory Kinds: Wherein a new and successful Method is proposed
for removing them speedily. To which is added, An Essay on the Crises of
those Disorders. By Lionel Chalmers, M. D. of Charles-Town. Price 2s.
sewed.

III. An Answer to the Observations of Mr. Geach, and to the Cursory
Remarks of Mr. Alcock, on Dr. Baker’s Essay on the Endemial Colic of
Devonshire. In a Letter from Dr. Saunders to Dr. Baker. Price 1s.

IV. A new and easy Method of giving Mercury to those affected with the
Venereal Disease. To which is annexed a new Theory of the Action of
this Metal on the salivary Glands. Translated from the Latin of Joseph
James Plenck, Professor of Surgery and Midwifry at Vienna. The Second
Edition. To which is prefixed, a Table, exhibiting, at one View, all the
Preparations of Mercury, reduced under proper Heads. With an Appendix of
Remarks on Mr. Plenck; together with some Experiments and Observations,
which ascertain, with more Accuracy, a steady and uniform Method of
giving his Medicine; and a short and easy Method of preparing the
Mercurius Calcinatus. By William Saunders, M. D. Price 2s. sewed.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY ON DISEASES INCIDENTAL TO LITERARY AND SEDENTARY PERSONS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


