The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ye Olde Mint
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ye Olde Mint

Author: Frank H. Stewart


        
Release date: June 13, 2021 [eBook #65613]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/65613

Credits: Charlene Taylor and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YE OLDE MINT ***

[Illustration: MINT OFFICE BUILDING

37 AND 39 NORTH SEVENTH STREET]




                              Ye Olde Mint

                 Being a brief description of the first
                   U. S. Mint, established by Congress
                   in the year 1792, at Seventh Street
                  and Sugar Alley (now Filbert Street)
                              Philadelphia

                             COMPLIMENTS OF
                      Frank H. Stewart Electric Co.
                  7th and Filbert Streets Philadelphia

                             Copyright 1909
                      Frank H. Stewart Electric Co.
                            Philadelphia, Pa.




FOREWORD


The great interest shown in numismatics and antiquities nowadays has
caused this imperfect endeavor to collate some of the interesting
historical data still in existence regarding the first United States
Mint, and also at the same time preserve by means of photographs and
descriptions the present appearance of the old buildings.

Practically every chronological list of important events which have
happened in the United States records the establishment of the first
United States Mint in Philadelphia in 1792, and if anyone has the time
and inclination to investigate the history and coinage of the mint
for the first forty (40) years of its existence, and publish to the
numismatic world the result of his research, I shall be satisfied if my
efforts here should furnish the slightest inspiration.

Numismatists very rarely, if ever, pay any attention to the persons who
made their rare and valuable specimens of coins, and probably still less
attention to the places where they were made.

The great majority of the rare United States coins were made in buildings
still standing at 37 and 39 North Seventh Street, Philadelphia, or, to
be more exact, in the coinage building in the rear of these numbers.
Until recently these buildings were unmarked, and the people of the
neighborhood in a great many instances were unaware of the fact that for
a period of forty (40) years all of the United States coins were made
so near at hand. Those who daily walked past the buildings had nothing
to direct their attention to them, and it is safe to say that not five
hundred persons in Philadelphia could point out what at one time was one
of the most important buildings in the United States, as well as the
first erected under authority of Congress for Federal purposes.

The author purchased the buildings and feels that it is his duty to do
what he can to describe them before they are demolished, and also at the
same time publish such data in his possession as may prove interesting
or valuable to the limited few who collect rare coins or are in any way
interested in what was an exceedingly important department of our early
national life.

                                                        FRANK H. STEWART.




[Illustration: COINAGE BUILDING

REAR OF 37 AND 39 NORTH SEVENTH STREET

UNDOUBTEDLY THE FIRST BRICK BUILDING ERECTED BY ACT OF CONGRESS FOR
PUBLIC USE]




Ye OLDE MINT


The first United States mint buildings are indeed historical in more ways
than one, and while a number of suggestions have been made for their
preservation it is highly probable they will eventually be located by the
means of a bronze tablet on the front of the steel and concrete structure
in contemplation for the use of the Frank H. Stewart Electric Company,
who now occupy the buildings adjoining them on the south and east. The
retention of the buildings on the present site is prohibited on account
of the great value of the land and its location in the heart of the
business section, and their removal by private enterprise to another site
unlikely because of the great expense that such removal would entail.

If a few 1804 dollars, which now have a record price of thirty-six
hundred dollars each, should be found in the buildings, their removal
would be rendered easier, provided they were found before the destruction
of the buildings, but this is highly improbable, although there will
undoubtedly be a few coins discovered, as there were when the building
was erected on the Filbert Street lot on the site of the old mint
smelting house, which is contiguous to the Seventh Street lot.

Washington in his first annual address to Congress referred to the
importance of uniformity in the currency.

His second annual address urged the importance of the establishment of a
mint.

In his third address he spoke of disorders in the existing currency, the
scarcity of change, and recommended carrying into effect the resolution
already entered into concerning the establishment of a mint; also
remarked that measures had been taken for procuring some of the most
necessary artists, together with the necessary apparatus.

His fourth annual address referred to employment of artists, both from
abroad and at home, to aid in the establishment of the mint. He also
stated that provision had been made for the requisite buildings, which
were then being put in proper condition, and spoke of a small beginning
in the coinage of half “dismes.”

His sixth annual address stated “the mint had entered upon the coinage
of the precious metals, and there was a pleasing prospect that the
institution would at no remote day realize the expectation which was
originally formed of its utility.”

His seventh annual address called attention to “the necessity of further
legislation for checking abuses in particular quarters, and for carrying
its business more completely into effect.”

It will be seen from Washington’s reference in six out of eight of
his messages to Congress to the currency and mint that he was deeply
interested in the matter and considered it of more than ordinary
importance.

It has been stated that he was a frequent visitor to the mint, and that
the first silver dismes and half dismes were made from silver contributed
by him. The will of John L. Kates, a former owner of the buildings, says
that the corner-stone was laid by Washington, but this is unlikely,
as he was not in Philadelphia the day on which it is supposed to have
been laid. The contents of the corner-stone when found will undoubtedly
contain something of great interest to antiquarians.

The original buildings, with the exception of the smelting house, still
stand at 37 and 39 North Seventh Street, and in the rear of these
numbers. There were three different brick buildings, all separated by
yards and alleys, those facing Seventh Street were used for executive
offices, etc. Immediately back of them was the one used as the coinage
department, and back of that was the small two-story building facing
Filbert Street and about twenty feet back of the line of that street. The
old building used as the smelting house was torn down the latter part of
1907, and a four-story concrete building erected on the site.

The frontispiece shows the front buildings facing Seventh Street, and the
illustration opposite page 5 the coinage building back of them, which is
separated from the front buildings by a court yard 18 feet deep. Inasmuch
as considerable attempt at ornamentation was made on the front of the
coinage building, it is quite probable that this was the first building
erected. Tradition has it that this was originally three stories high and
that the top story was burned off. If such was the case the third story
was of wooden construction. The walled up windows in the rear show the
window sills to be badly charred.

Remains of old arched brick vaults still exist in the basement of 39
North Seventh Street.

The building in the rear, used as the coinage department, has two arched
and paved brick vaults in its basement intact except the doors. One of
the vaults, illustrated opposite page 9, has a smaller vault in its rear
end, which was undoubtedly used as a storage place for the most valuable
of the mint’s possessions. Strong brick arches and exceedingly heavy
joists, averaging twelve inches square, were placed in the basement to
support the coinage presses above.

The building formerly facing Filbert Street had no basement, and when
excavations were made for the new building two old brick-walled wells
were uncovered, one of which was four feet in diameter, with cesspool
refuse in the bottom. The other well was about seven feet in diameter and
the bottom was not reached, as the excavations only went down about 12
feet. These wells were between the old building and Filbert Street. The
larger one was three or four feet back of the centre of the property at
35 North Seventh Street, and the other was just off the southeast corner
of the demolished building. It is quite likely that the largest well
furnished water for the distillery of Michael Shubart.

It is interesting to note that in the excavations on the site of the old
building, several copper coins and planchets were found, most of which
are illustrated opposite page 20. Two worthy of mention are about the
size of half-cents, but with small holes in the centre, one of them
having a milled edge, the other a plain edge. They are supposed to be
planchets for the excessively rare 1792 silver centre cents, which must
certainly have been struck off at the mint, otherwise the planchets
would not have been found there. The author now has these finds in his
possession, as well as a collection of hand forged hardware taken off the
old building.

On May 8, 1792, the director of the mint was authorized, with the
approbation of the President, to purchase a quantity of copper for the
coinage of cents and half-cents, and Congress also provided that when
fifty thousand (50,000) dollars of such cents and half-cents had been
coined notice should be given to the public in at least two newspapers,
and that any attempt to pass other copper coins would result in their
forfeiture.

From a national viewpoint the old mint buildings are the most historical
in the United States, because they were the first erected by the
authority of the Federal Government for public use. It was the sole
United States Mint from 1792 to 1833. The corner-stone was laid July 31,
1792, and presumably by David Rittenhouse, the celebrated astronomer
and philosopher and first director of the mint. The achievements of
Rittenhouse very readily place him in the same distinguished class as
Benjamin Franklin.

The ground on which the first United States mint buildings stand was sold
by William Penn to the Pennsylvania Land Company, and transferred to it
by deed dated August 12, 1699, “in the 11th year of our Sovereign Lord
King William III, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland.”

The Pennsylvania Land Company then consisted of Tobias Collett,
haberdasher; Michael Russell, weaver; Daniel Quare, watchmaker, and Henry
Goldney, linendraper, all of London, England.

[Illustration: VAULT WITHIN A VAULT

BASEMENT OF COINAGE BUILDING

THE “BURGLAR PROOF” OF 1792]

The deed was signed by Penn August 17, 1699, and was stamped with two
six-penny stamps. The consideration was 2,000 pounds. Herbert Springett,
Wm. Martin and Wm. Springett acted as witnesses.

The mint grounds are part of “six inland city lots, lying between the two
rivers, Delaware and Schuylkill.”

This deed, in addition to the six city lots which were evidently thrown
in as a bonus, conveyed two river front lots, one on the Delaware and one
on the Schuylkill, also 60,310 acres of land, variously and indefinitely
located for the greater part. Two hundred and ten acres of this land
was granted by warrant to Richard Noble, “old renter,” by Penn the 14th
day of the 5th month, 1683, and afterwards by a patent to Noble the 5th
day of the 6th month, 1685, by Thomas Lloyd, James Claypoole and Robert
Turner, commissioners for Penn.

Another parcel of 100 acres of this land was part of a tract of 309
acres, “granted by an order from New York,” and surveyed on or about
the 12th day of May, 1679, unto Wm. Clark, and afterwards disposed of
to Richard Noble, and which was on the 8th day of the 8th month, 1689,
granted and confirmed unto Noble by Wm. Markham and John Goodson,
commissioners for Penn.

The 310 acres were transferred to Penn by Noble February 22, 1695.

The Penn deed to the Pennsylvania Land Company gives recital of grant to
Penn by Charles II.

Richard Noble came over in the ship Griffith with John Fenwick in 1675
and landed at Salem, N. J. The Griffith was the first English ship to
land in west New Jersey.

Noble surveyed and plotted the town of Burlington, N. J., in 1677, and
on December 15, 1679, was appointed surveyor by Governor Andross, of New
York, as surveyor of Upland, now Chester, Pa. He also surveyed a part of
the present site of Philadelphia for the Swedes, Swansons, in 1681.

Wm. Markham was a cousin of Wm. Penn and landed in America in 1681.
He at one time held a captaincy in the English army. He was the first
Deputy-Governor of Pennsylvania.

Thomas Lloyd was president of council, justice of the peace of
Philadelphia, and _de facto_ Deputy-Governor in 1690. He founded, under
Penn’s instructions, the first public school in Pennsylvania in 1689.

James Claypoole built the first brick house in Philadelphia, and was a
member of council in 1687 and one of the Free Society of Traders.

Robert Turner was a close friend of Penn, and at one time a merchant
of Dublin, Ireland. Penn was in frequent correspondence with him and,
among other things, wrote him on May 5, 1681, how and why the name of
Pennsylvania was selected. He was also a member of the Free Society of
Traders.

John Goodson was a prominent man in the early days of the settlement
of Pennsylvania, and like Markham, Lloyd, Claypoole, Turner and others
empowered to sell land for Penn.

The Pennsylvania Land Company held possession until December 26, 1758,
when Francis Rawle, acting as its attorney, transferred a parcel
containing part of the mint lots to Daniel Roberdeau, he being the
highest bidder at a public sale.

This piece of land was described as a “certain piece of ground situate
on the east side of the Seventh Street from the Delaware, City of
Philadelphia, containing in breadth on the said street 50 feet, and in
length or depth 198 feet, or thereabouts, be the same more or less, to
the middle or half way between Sixth Street and Seventh Street,” bounded
on the south by the back ends of High Street (now Market) and on the
north by land of Rebecca Cooper.

On December 26, 1758 (the same date as the Roberdeau deed) Francis
Rawle, attorney for Thomas Hyam, merchant; Thomas Reynolds, clothworker,
and Thomas How, goldsmith, only surviving feoffees in trust of the
Pennsylvania Land Company, sold to Rebecca Cooper, spinster, as the
highest bidder at public sale, “a certain piece of ground situate on
the east side of the Seventh Street from Delaware in the said City of
Philadelphia, containing in breadth on the same street 50 feet.”

This lot was also 198 feet deep and bounded on the east by land conveyed
to Richard Farmer, as was the ground sold to Daniel Roberdeau. Joshua
Howell and William Govett were witnesses on both the deeds and both were
acknowledged before Isaac Jones, Justice.

Daniel Roberdeau, by deed dated February 27, 1759, conveyed to Richard
Farmer, practitioner in physics, the same piece of ground he purchased at
auction of the Pennsylvania Land Company. Deed witnessed by H. W. Dovey
and John Reily.

Rebecca Cooper, by deed dated April 3, 1759, also sold to Richard Farmer
the ground she purchased at auction of the Pennsylvania Land Company. Her
lot was bounded on the south by ground late of Daniel Roberdeau.

These two pieces of ground of 50 feet each on Seventh Street, each
contained part of what afterwards became the mint lot, which faced
Seventh Street, and which was, and now is, 36 feet 10 inches front,
with another lot making an outlet on Filbert Street, now covered by a
four-story concrete and steel-frame building occupied by the Frank H.
Stewart Electric Company, and connected by openings with the building on
the northeast corner of Seventh and Filbert Streets, also occupied by the
same concern.

Richard Farmer and wife, by deed dated September 1, 1760, conveyed to
Michael Shubart, distiller, “two certain pieces of ground,” one of which
was located on Seventh Street, with a frontage of 36 feet and 10 inches
and with a depth of 99 feet, which was bounded on the south by a piece of
ground sold by Farmer to George Keller, 20 feet by 99 feet.

The other piece of ground was on the north side of a certain 14-foot
alley (now Filbert Street, mentioned for the first time), containing in
breadth 17 feet on the alley and 56 feet 10 inches deep, connecting with
above lot in the rear and for its entire width as well as the Keller lot.

The consideration was a yearly ground rental of 21 Spanish silver pieces
of 8 of 17 pennyweight and 6 grains each, with the option within
seven years of cancellation by payment of 133 pounds, lawful money of
Pennsylvania.

Shubart agreed to erect within four (4) years on one of the pieces of
ground one good brick kitchen, or tenement, or other brick building at
least 15 feet square.

This deed was witnessed by Robert Wilson, Jr., and John Clarkson;
acknowledged by Wm. Peters, justice.

This transfer shows that the High Street lots, near Seventh Street,
extended at one time back to what is now Filbert Street, and also that
Richard Farmer’s land was taken in whole or in part for the purpose of
what then was termed an alley, and later known as Sugar Alley, then
Farmers Street, and now Filbert Street.

James Ash, high sheriff, on May 27, 1790, conveyed to Frederick Hailer
the land purchased by Shubart from Farmer, together with a tenement
distill house and coppers, distills, worms, cisterns, tubs and other
utensils belonging to said distillery.

This conveyance was subject to the payment of the yearly ground rent of
21 Spanish pieces of 8.

Jacob Barge was the creditor who caused the sale.

Frederick Wailer, surgeon barber, and wife, Christiana, July 18, 1792,
sold to the United States Government the land and distill house and frame
tenement building formerly owned by Shubart.

This deed recites the Act of Congress referred to elsewhere, and states
“the President in pursuance thereof caused to be purchased from said
Wailer, etc., etc.”

Wailer made a nice profit. He bought it for 515 pounds and sold it for
4,266⅔ dollars, subject to the ground rent as before.

This deed was acknowledged by Wailer and wife before James Biddle,
president of the Court of Common Pleas, of the County of Philadelphia,
July 21, 1792.

During the entire time the government owned the property it paid an
annual ground rent, which seems rather strange now.

On July 1, 1792, Washington appointed David Rittenhouse director of the
mint, and on July 19th, the day following the purchase, eight carpenters,
besides other laborers, commenced to tear down the distillery, and on
August 25th the frame work for the new building was raised.

Work on the bellows furnaces was commenced September 7th, and on
September 11th six pounds of old copper for coinage was purchased at the
price of one shilling three pence per pound.

Three coining presses, imported from Europe, arrived September 21st, and
in October they were in operation.

On December 30, 1792, Jefferson, then Secretary of State, wrote Pinckney,
our minister to England, about the difficulty of procuring copper, and
suggested Sweden as a source of supply and enclosed draft on the treasury
of the United States for $10,000.

The United States of America on January 12, 1836, by deed reciting Act
of Congress under date of May 1, 1830, transferred the mint grounds and
buildings to Michael Kates, bell hanger, for $8,100, he having been the
highest bidder at public sale. In this deed the 14-foot alley was called
Sugar Alley and the ground rent again noted.

Andrew Jackson, President of the United States of America, signed this
deed and the great seal of the United States of America was attached.
John Forsyth, Secretary of State, witnessed the President’s signature.

On February 18, 1836, Francis Hopkinson, Clerk of the District and
Circuit Courts of the United States of America for the eastern district
of Pennsylvania, appeared before John Swift, Mayor of the City of
Philadelphia, and on his oath said he was acquainted with the signatures
of both Jackson and Forsyth and was satisfied they were their own and
proper signatures.

The neighborhood of the old mint is rich in traditions regarding it, and
it may happen that when the buildings are torn down some of them will be
substantiated.

During the War of 1812 Dr. R. M. Patterson, Adam Eckfelt and Joseph
Cloud, respectively director of the mint, chief coiner, melter and
refiner, were engaged at the Breast Works at Grays Ferry, and, as these
gentlemen were the chief employees of the mint at the time, it is highly
probable there was considerable alarm over the safety of the mint. Among
other traditions is one that the bullion, planchets and coins were walled
up and buried during this scare. The actions of the British at Washington
showed their tendency towards destruction of government property.

An old lady living in West Philadelphia has the original appointment
of her ancestor, Joseph Cloud, to his position in the mint, signed by
Washington. She would not even allow it to be photographed for fear
something might happen to it while in the photographer’s hands.

Biddle’s Directory of 1791 gives the address of Michael Shubart,
distiller, as 29 North Seventh Street; Hardie’s 1793 directory gives
the mint at 29 North Seventh Street, which indicates that a change of
numbers in the mint property has been made since that time. Shubart was
a prominent Philadelphian; during the Revolution he was a city assessor,
and on one occasion took an unconditional oath while his colleagues
made a reservation. In the elaborate pageant of July 4, 1788, he bore
the Standard at the head of the distillery section, followed by other
notables engaged in that business.

Daniel Roberdeau, mentioned elsewhere as an owner of part of the mint
grounds, at one time was a brigadier-general of militia, and his name
appears frequently in the Revolutionary Annals of Philadelphia as a man
of pronounced ideas and stern character.

The beginning of the mint establishment may be traced back to the
articles of Confederation, dated July 9, 1778, which contained the
following: “The United States in Congress assembled shall also have the
sole and exclusive right and power of regulating the alloy and value of
coin struck by their own authority or by that of the respective States.”

The Constitution of the United States, September 17, 1787, contains in
Article I, Section 8: “The Congress shall have power to coin money,
regulate the value thereof and of foreign coins”; and further, “No State
shall coin money, emit bills of credit, make anything but gold and silver
coin a tender in payment of debts.”

Analysis of the above will show the reason why the various States
discontinued their own coinage.

The Continental Congress, January 7, 1782, instructed Robert Morris,
the financier of the Revolution, to prepare and report a table of
rates at which the different species of foreign coins most likely to
circulate within the United States should be received at the treasury.
On January 15th, the week following, he made a lengthy report regarding
the different names and values of coins then in use and the necessity
of a legal tender. He stated that the necessary machinery for a mint
could easily be made and that the advantage of possessing legal money in
preference to any other would induce people to carry foreign money to the
mint until a sufficiency were struck for the circulating medium, and the
remainder of foreign gold and silver coins should be left entirely to the
operations of commerce as bullion.

On April 14, 1790, Thomas Jefferson reported to the House of
Representatives, advising the declination of the proposition of John
H. Mitchell regarding his offer to furnish coins from Europe at a
fixed price per pound for copper coins. His objections were that
the opportunity of recoinage of coins would be lost, and that in
transportation across the ocean it would be subject to the dangers of the
sea, acts of piracy, and, in times of war, would offer the sinews of war
to the enterprise of the enemy, and further, that the resource of coining
household plate would be lost. The risk of counterfeiting was also noted.

Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury, on January 28, 1791, as
a result of instructions on the part of the House of Representatives on
April 15, 1790, sent a lengthy communication to it on “The Establishment
of a Mint.” This communication was evidently the basis for the act of
Congress, dated April 2, 1792, establishing the mint and regulating the
coins of the United States.

The mint was to be situated at the seat of government, then Philadelphia,
and the President, in addition to the authority given him under the Act
of March 3, 1791, was authorized to cause to be provided and put in
proper condition such buildings as appeared to him to be necessary for
carrying on the business of the mint.

The Act of March 3, 1791, approved by President Washington, authorized
the establishment of a mint under such regulations as should be directed
by law. This Act authorized him to cause to be engaged artists and the
procurement of the necessary apparatus.

On December 30, 1793, Jefferson wrote the President regarding artists. He
mentioned that a certain Drotz had been hired, but, after considerable
delay, refused to come to America, and that our minister at London had
succeeded in getting Mr. Albion Coxe, who was probably the person of that
name who had the right to make copper coins for the State of New Jersey
in 1786, to accept the position as assayer. Inasmuch as it was impossible
to secure abroad a chief coiner of greater ability than at home, Mr.
Henry Voight, who was temporarily in the position, was favorably
mentioned.

These two men were required to furnish security in the sum of ten
thousand dollars each, which neither was able to do, and Jefferson stated
that the coinage of precious metals was prevented for some time past, but
that in order that the mint might not be entirely idle the coinage of
copper had been going on. Jefferson recommended that their securities be
lessened by reducing their responsibilities.

[Illustration: BASEMENT OF COINAGE BUILDING

SHOWING PRESS SUPPORTS AND HAMMERED ONE INCH SQUARE IRON WINDOW BARS.
TIMBERS AVERAGE 12 INCHES SQUARE. CUT SHOWS NEARLY ONE HALF OF BASEMENT.]

October 28, 1794, David Rittenhouse, director of the mint, reported that
it had been necessary to purchase an additional lot of ground, that
nearly one million of cents had been coined and a beginning made in the
coinage of precious metals, that nearly 120,000 ounces of bullion had
been deposited for coinage and that a large parcel of blank dollars was
ready for coining as soon as a more powerful press could be finished.

February 9, 1795, Mr. Boudinot, one of the Congressional Committee
appointed to examine and report on the state of the mint, made a long
report on the duties and work of the various employees.

At that time besides the buildings at 37 and 39 North Seventh Street,
now belonging to the Frank H. Stewart Electric Company, a lease was held
on one in the “Northern Liberties” for five years at the rent of five
shillings per annum, a very trifling sum indeed.

There was more or less criticism about the conduct of the mint which
Mr. Boudinot explained was due to trouble in getting competent workmen,
proper materials and strong apparatus. He reported the lots for the
buildings were too small and that this hindered the operations; and,
further, that the frequent breaking of dies, which were all made in
the mint, caused numerous delays. Up to September, 1794, the lands
purchased had cost $4,266.66; buildings, apparatus, machines, etc.,
$22,720.45; copper, $15,815.51; salaries, $15,591.99, a grand total of
$58,394.61, which he considered a very great amount. He remarked that a
great saving could be made if the machinery could be operated by water
or steam instead of manual labor or that of horses. He noted that in
case the projected canal between the Schuylkill and Delaware should be
accomplished the heavy expense of the mint would be greatly reduced.

His report, among other things, showed that when the bullion was not
in use it was kept under two locks, the keys of which were kept by the
assayer and chief coiner. This was for the time it was in the custody
of the chief coiner. That part not in his custody was in the vaults of
the mint, also secured under two locks, keys of which were kept by the
treasurer and assayer. Mention is made elsewhere regarding these vaults.
He recommended a reduction in the size of the copper cent and a change in
the standard for silver coins to ten parts silver and one part copper.

Henry William DeSaussure in a letter, dated the mint office, October
27, 1795, to the President of the United States, George Washington,
apologized for the length of his communication and said he was prepared
to deliver the direction of the mint to his successor.

He stated the coinage of gold had begun under his administration. He
deemed it proper to state there was no copper in the mint fit for
coining, and that the price of copper had advanced, and suggested the
desirability of reducing the weight of the cent and thereby help in
preventing its use by coppersmiths.

He mentioned the important fact that the standard of the silver coin in
use at the mint differed from the standard fixed by law. He thought that
either the law should be changed or the standard used according to law.

He suggested the desirability of having laws made to close up certain
establishments making debased foreign coins and thereby curtailing the
supply of gold bullion and degrading our national character.

He referred to an attempt on the mint dies and implements with nefarious
views.

Elias Boudinot, in a letter dated at the mint, December 3, 1795, referred
to the sudden death of Assayer Mr. Albion Coxe on the preceding Friday,
and said “until this officer is replaced the business of the mint would
be confined to striking cents only.” In the same letter he recommended,
among other things, “that some proper person be authorized to purchase
on public account all small quantities of silver and gold brought to the
mint, at the best market price, to be coined for the public treasury.”

Elias Boudinot, in a very able letter to the President, dated at the
mint, November 29, 1796, told how impossible it was to run the mint with
business-like dispatch, hampered as it was by unreasonable restrictions.
He pointed out how in one case a depositor of bullion below standard got
500 pounds sterling more than he should and still was within his legal
rights. In other words, it cost the mint that much to refine the bullion
for which it received no compensation. He also pointed out how expensive
it was to coin bullion in rotation so that each depositor got his money
in turn. In this way it was just as expensive to melt and refine 20
ounces as 1,000 ounces and he recommended a fund for the mint to be used
in paying off small depositors of bullion and thus be able to melt and
refine in larger quantities.

February 13, 1797, Mr. Havens, of the committee to examine and report on
Mr. Boudinot’s letter, made his report to Congress and recommended the
sum of $2,820.71 be appropriated to make good the deficiency caused by
wastage in coining gold and silver since the commencement of the coinage
of these metals. The report was substantially a confirmation of the
statements made by Mr. Boudinot.

May 19, 1798, recommendation of allowance to John Vaughan was made
because silver bullion, to the extent of 230,888 ounces, deposited by him
was of greater fineness than that regularly used in coinage.

During the latter part of 1797 it became very apparent that the out-put
of the mint was not sufficient for the needs of the country, and foreign
coins were necessarily continued as legal tender despite legislation to
the contrary.

Elias Boudinot, in a letter from the mint to the President, dated January
3, 1799, mentioned that during the previous summer a scheme for robbing
the mint was discovered. One of the persons in the mint was in collusion
with outside parties. The offenders were detected, prosecuted and
punished.

January 8, 1800, Boudinot reported to President Adams and called his
attention to the fact that fifty thousand one hundred and eleven dollars
and forty-two cents ($50,111.42) of cents, had been coined and that it
was necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States to
comply with provisions of law of May 8, 1792, by giving the public notice
therein mentioned.

Also brought up the point that the mint was not at the seat of
government, which had been moved to Washington, and if mint was to be
removed steps should be taken immediately regarding it.

Also called attention to workmen in gold and silver melting down coins
for commercial purposes to the loss of the United States.

Mr. Hillhouse, of the committee to whom was referred the report of the
director of the mint to the President of the United States, on January
8, 1800, recommended, on March 18, 1800, that a committee be appointed
to bring in a bill for repealing the first section of the Act entitled,
“An Act establishing a mint and regulating the coins of the United
States....” dated April 21, 1792, and such other sections and parts of
sections of said Act as relate to the establishment of the mint, and to
provide for taking care of the materials and property appertaining to
the mint and which belong to the United States; and, further, that the
Secretary of the Treasury be directed to report a plan for furnishing the
United States with cents and half-cents as shall be deemed necessary or
expedient.

February 13, 1801, Elias Boudinot advised the President that the
Secretary of State, Secretary of Treasury, Comptroller of the Treasury,
the Chief Justice and Attorney-General were not present on the day
specified by law to assay reserved pieces of coins, and that the
depositors complained of their being deprived of their reserved money,
and that the check on coinage contemplated by law was frustrated. Also
mentioned that the act of July 16, 1790, provided for removal of all
offices attached to the seat of government to the District of Columbia
on the first Monday in December, 1800. Called attention to Act of last
session of Congress locating mint in Philadelphia until March 4th next.

[Illustration: PLANCHETS FOR COPPER CENTS, HALF CENTS AND SILVER CENTRE
CENTS, ALSO PIECE OF SCRAP COPPER FROM WHICH A HALF CENT WAS STRUCK, ALL
FOUND WHILE EXCAVATIONS WERE BEING MADE FOR NEW BUILDING 631 FILBERT
STREET. SIZE 15/16 OF ORIGINALS.]

He, on February 27, 1802, in a communication to the Secretary of the
Treasury, calls attention to outstanding contracts for copper abroad
which were obligatory, and the difficulty attending the securing of
copper in the past. Questioned the scheme of importing coined copper
cents because of a chance of a flood of lightweight cents contrary to
law, and suggested that the government would have greater security by
placing contract in United States.

On March 4, 1802, Robert Scott, engraver at the mint, wrote the Secretary
of Treasury, Albert Gallatin, calling attention to the probability
of abolishment of the mint, explained the sacrifices he had made and
desired to be invested with the exclusive privilege, according to law, of
furnishing cents of the regular weight and quality free of all expense to
the government at the face value.

In a letter dated March 22, 1802, Mint of the United States,
Philadelphia, Elias Boudinot wrote the Secretary of Treasury, giving an
inventory of the real and personal property of the mint, as follows:

“Two lots on Seventh Street between Market and Arch, 20 feet each on
Seventh Street and extending back 100 feet, with a dwelling house on the
north lot and a shell of a house on the south lot, which last lot widens
on the rear to about 60 feet on which the stable stands. These lots pay a
ground rent of $27.50 per annum.

“A lot on Sugar Alley at the rear of the above, 20-feet front on the
alley and about 100-feet deep.

“A frame building improved for a large furnace in the commons at the
north end of Sixth Street, of little value, the ground being merely
loaned to us.

“Personal estate—copper planchets on hand, 22 tons.

“Three horses, good for little but for use of mint.

“Machinery of mint no value except for mint.

“Five striking presses.

“Three cutting presses.

“One milling machine.

“Five pairs rollers, great and small.

“One drawing machine.

“Three pairs smith’s bellows.

“Set blacksmith’s tools.

“Large number of hubs and dies.

“Carpenter’s tools.

“Seven stoves.

“One turning lathe.

“Six scale beams, scales and weights.

“Two sets assay scales and sundry adjusting scales.

“Furniture in clerks’ rooms.

“Various implements used in the several departments.

“About 2,000 bushels charcoal.

“Engravers’ tools, pots, bottles, etc.

“An old horse cart and gears.

“About 2,000 fire brick.

“Considerable quantity of old iron.”

Stated machinery was in poor repair and should be moved by steam instead
of horses. Said lots were too small and was greatly cramped for room.

Said lots were then very valuable, being in the heart of the city. In his
opinion the necessary coins of the government could not be protected at
much less expense than the mint cost.

In this inventory no mention was made of the building used by the coinage
department, and which, no doubt, was the best and most important building
then on the lots. The sizes of the lots given are inaccurate, and the
idea evidently intended to be conveyed was that there was very little of
value in buildings or equipment.

In 1793 salaries of the mint employees were as follows:

    David Rittenhouse, director, $2,000 per annum
    Tristram Dalton, treasurer,   1,200  ”    ”
    Henry Voight, coiner,         1,500  ”    ”
    Isaac Hugh, clerk,              312  ”    ”

The regular coinage of copper began in 1793; silver in 1794, and gold in
1795.

The following curious extracts are taken from the mint rules and
regulations, dated January 1, 1825:

“The allowance under the name of drink money is hereafter to be
discontinued.”

“The operations of the mint throughout the year are to commence at 5
o’clock in the morning.”

“Christmas Day and the Fourth of July—and no other days—are established
holidays at the mint.”

“He (watchman) will keep in a proper arm chest, securely locked, a musket
and bayonet, two pistols and a sword. The arms are to be kept in perfect
order and to be inspected by an officer once a month, when the arms are
to be discharged and charged anew.

“The watchman of the mint must attend from 6 o’clock in the evening
to 5 o’clock in the morning—and until relieved by the permission of
an officer, or until the arrival of the doorkeeper. He will ring the
yard bell precisely every hour by the mint clock from 10 o’clock until
relieved by the doorkeeper, or an officer, or the workmen on working
days, and will send the watch-dog through the yard immediately after
ringing the bell.”

The operations at the mint were suspended at different times because of
yellow fever epidemics, and this, in connection with the scarcity of
metal, and a fire at the mint and the use of coins for purely commercial
purposes by coppersmiths, silversmiths and other tradesmen, accounts
for the scarcity of certain coins made at “Ye Olde Mint,” under great
disadvantages, when men and horses did the work now done by electricity.




Copy of Letter Regarding Purchase of First U. S. Mint Lots.


                                                            June 9, 1792.

DEAR SIR:

I am in sentiment with you and the Director of the Mint, respecting the
purchase of the lots and houses which are offered for sale, in preference
to renting—as the latter will certainly exceed the interest of the former.

That all the applications may be brought to view, and considered for
coining, &c., Mr. Lear will lay the letters and engravings before you, to
be shewn to the Director of the Mint. I have no other object or wish in
doing it, than to obtain the best.

                               Yours, &c.,

                                                          Go. WASHINGTON.

MR. JEFFERSON.




[Illustration: COINS FOUND IN EXCAVATIONS MADE FOR BASEMENT OF CONCRETE
BUILDING NOW IN REAR OF COINAGE BUILDING. SIZE 31/32 OF ORIGINALS.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YE OLDE MINT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


