The Project Gutenberg eBook of Some old masters of Greek architecture
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Some old masters of Greek architecture

Author: Harry Douglas

Illustrator: Charles D. Farrand


        
Release date: March 8, 2025 [eBook #75561]

Language: English

Original publication: Great Barrington: Quarter-Oak, 1899

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/75561

Credits: Bob Taylor, deaurider and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME OLD MASTERS OF GREEK ARCHITECTURE ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




[Illustration: TROPHONIUS SLAYING AGAMEDES AT THE TREASURY OF HYRIEUS.]




  SOME OLD MASTERS
  OF GREEK
  ARCHITECTURE

  By HARRY DOUGLAS

  CURATOR OF [Illustration: Decoration]
  KELLOGG TERRACE

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  PUBLISHED AT THE
  QUARTER-OAK
  GREAT BARRINGTON,
  MASS., 1899 [Illustration: Decoration]




  _Copyright, 1899_,
  BY HARRY DOUGLAS.




[Illustration: Decoration]




  TO EDWARD
  FRANCIS
  SEARLES

  WHOSE APPRECIATION OF THE HARMONIES OF ART, AND
  WHOSE HIGH IDEALS OF ARCHITECTURE HAVE FOUND
  EXPRESSION IN MANY ENDURING FORMS, THIS BOOK IS
  RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.

[Illustration: Decoration]




PREFACE


The temptation to wander, with all the recklessness of an amateur,
into the traditions of the best architecture, which necessarily could
be found only in the history of early Hellenic art, awakened in the
author a desire to ascertain who were the individual artists primarily
responsible for those architectural standards, which have been accepted
without rival since their creation. The search led to some surprise
when it was found how little was known or recorded of them, and how
great appeared to be the indifference in which they were held by nearly
all the writers upon ancient art, as well as by their contemporary
historians and biographers. The author therefore has gone into the
field of history, tradition and fable, with a basket on his arm, as it
were, to cull some of the rare and obscure flowers of this artistic
family, dropping into the basket also such facts directly or indirectly
associated with the architects of ancient Greece, or their art, as
interested him personally. The basket is here set down, containing,
if nothing more, at least a brief allusion to no less than eighty-two
architects of antiquity. The fact is perfectly appreciated that many
fine specimens may have been overlooked; that scant justice has been
done those gathered, and that the basket is far too small to contain
all that so rich a field could offer.

This book, therefore, aims at nothing more than a superficial glance
at the subject, and the author will be content if he has accomplished
anything toward bringing those great geniuses of a noble art into a
little modern light, who have been left very much to themselves in one
of the gloomiest chambers of a deep obscurity.




CONTENTS


                                                                    PAGE

  1. POPULAR APPRECIATION OF ARCHITECTS,                               1

  2. MYTHICAL AND ARCHAIC ARCHITECTS AND
      BUILDERS,                                                       24

  3. ORIGINATORS OF THE “THREE ORDERS,”                               49

  4. EARLY GRECIAN ARCHITECTS,                                        63

  5. ARCHITECTURAL EPOCH OF PERICLES,                                 90

  6. ARCHITECTS OF THE AGE OF PERICLES,                              103

  7. LATER GREEK ARCHITECTS,                                         136

  8. ALEXANDRIAN ERA, AND ROMAN SPOLIATION,                          148

  9. ALEXANDRIAN ARCHITECTS,                                         164

  INDEX OF ARCHITECTS AND ARCHITECTURAL SCULPTORS,                   185




CHAPTER I.

THE POPULAR APPRECIATION OF ARCHITECTS.


Of all the fine arts none more completely answers for its _raison
d’être_ than architecture. In this art alone do we find the harmonious
mingling of æsthetical fancy with utilitarian purpose. It is this
feature of usefulness that completes its well-rounded perfection,
rather than detracts from it, and dignifies its mission of existence.
Architecture, in its capacity to draw to its enrichment the other
arts, may be compared to the polished orator, whose purpose is to
sway the judgment of his audience by forensic effort, embellishing
his language with the flowers of rhetoric, adapting his gestures to
graceful emphasis, and controlling his voice to suit the light and
shade of his thought. So sculpture has been stimulated by architecture
and has contributed to its ornamentation; painting has been invoked to
the highest accomplishments, and music has awakened within its walls
voice and harmony. “The progress of other arts depends on that of
architecture,” Sir William Chambers very truly says. “When building
is encouraged, painting, sculpture, gardening and all other decorative
arts flourish of course, and these have an influence on manufactures,
even to the minutest mechanic productions; for design is of universal
advantage, and stamps a value on the most trifling performance.”

It is perhaps not a little odd that despite its pre-eminent importance,
and the high rank which it has ever assumed, from that early time when
the first rays of dawning civilization began to warm the latent germs
of culture and refinement in human nature, to the present day, it is
the only art that has not, with very rare and isolated exceptions,
stamped renown upon those who have practised it as a profession, and
lifted the artist into the lasting remembrance and gratitude of the
admirers of his works. How greatly the painter, the sculptor, the
musician, are identified with their arts, and the products of their
brush, chisel or pen! how great has been their praise, how lasting and
unstinted the esteem in which they have been held! but how reserved
has been the applause that has encouraged the architect who has given
to the world the grand and noble results of his skill and genius, and
how soon he himself has been forgotten! It happens only too often that
it is the name of the distinguished painter that stamps the value of
his canvas rather than the merits of the picture itself. The title
of a beautiful piece of sculptured marble is not asked with greater
eagerness than that of the artist who created it. Bach and Beethoven
and Mozart are played and sung to the popular audiences rather than
their fugues, their sonatas and their symphonies.

But what is known of the artists who have reared the greatest monuments
of enduring architecture? Their personality, and even their names,
appear to have faded from popular recollection. This seems to have
been the fact from the earliest days of the art in Greece and Rome
to the present time. The exceptions are so rare, throughout all the
intervening ages, and the waving prominence of the art, that they might
almost be numbered upon the fingers of a single hand.

The reader, if he is not a professional architect, or an amateur who
has read deeply in his favorite subject, can arrive at the truth of
this seemingly exaggerated statement, if he will lay aside this book
for a moment and try to recall the names of the designers of some of
the more conspicuous monuments of architecture he has visited at home
or abroad.

“I will erect such a building, but I will hang it up in the air,”
exclaimed Michael Angelo when he saw the dome of the Pantheon at Rome.
The reader may remember this boast of the great Renaissance genius, the
fulfilment of it in the colossal dome of St. Peter’s, and be satisfied
that his memory has captured one architect of celebrity. If the
beautiful Florentine campanile of Giotto looms up in his recollection
he will think at once also of that early artist, but perhaps not more
so in connection with that ornate tower than in association with the
Pre-Raphaelites. Of course, he will not overlook Inigo Jones, whose
very name is stamped upon the memory by reason of its peculiarity,
or Sir Christopher Wren, the creator of St. Paul’s, and the British
idol. If he is an admirer of the picturesque architecture of Venetian
churches and palaces, the Italian Palladio may not escape him; and
if of French Renaissance, the Louvre façade will possibly suggest
Perrault, and the Parisian roofs Mansard. If he is a native of our
“Modern Athens,” of course, the peril in which the classic front of
the State House rested for a time, at the hands of a _fin de siècle_
legislature, will not permit him to forget Bulfinch, and Trinity Church
will bring to memory the only Richardson. But aside from a few names
such as have been mentioned, with possibly a sprinkling of others
fixed in the memory, by incident or association, the average reader,
however well acquainted he may be with the numerous luminaries of the
other arts, will be unable to say who was responsible for the beauty
and nobility of many buildings that have individualized the cities and
towns of their location to the art-loving world. Who, for example,
can tell of the authors of the cathedrals at Milan and Siena, Cologne
and Strassburg, Rheims and Amiens, Wells and Litchfield; the Giralda
at Seville; the Church of the Invalides at Paris; the Strozzi Palace
at Florence; the Henry VII. chapel at Westminster Abbey; the much and
justly admired south façade of the old City Hall in New York; Grace
Church in that city; the Capitol building in Washington, or that model
of colonial architecture in America, the Executive Mansion?

It is not, however, the purpose to here speculate too extensively upon
the apparent lack of justice on the part of the general public which
has been done the architects of all climes and times, but to gather
together a few facts concerning the Old Masters of early Grecian
architecture that are not popularly known, and recall some of the
leading lights of that art so inimitably practised by the Hellenic
people during their progress from archaic darkness to the zenith of
their æsthetic culture.

It is but repeating a well-worn truth to say that the influence of
the early Grecian architects upon the followers of their art in all
countries of recognized civilized enlightenment, throughout the ages
that have succeeded them, has been an almost dominant one. Robert
Adam, the architectural authority in the time of George III., says,
in the introduction to his work on the ruins of the palace of the
Emperor Diocletian: “The buildings of the ancients are in architecture
what the works of nature are with respect to the other arts: they
serve as models which we should imitate and as standards by which we
ought to judge; for this reason they who aim at eminence, either in
the knowledge or practice of architecture, find it necessary to view
with their own eyes the works of the ancients which remain, that they
may catch from them those ideas of grandeur and beauty which nothing,
perhaps, but such an observation can suggest.”

It is equally true that no country that has experienced an evolution
in intelligence and culture, during the twenty-five hundred years that
have fled since the time of Pericles, has succeeded in introducing any
new school of architecture, that has not been compelled to draw upon
ancient Greece for many of the most important and essential features of
the art it could only modify, but never wholly re-create.

The Gothic, or pointed-arch style, that sprung into such beautiful
being in the thirteenth century, and reigned a queen within the
Christian countries of Europe for several centuries thereafter, came
more nearly answering for an original scheme of architecture than
perhaps any other of equal importance, and yet had it been deprived of
the Grecian props that helped to sustain it, it must have fallen to the
ground.

In the Gothic the effort was made to incline the inherited principles
of architecture more closely toward the spiritual progress of the
people, but when at last it had run its course, and was dethroned,
owing to a realization of the fact that even a closer allegiance
to classic models could be made to answer still better spiritual
requirements, how completely did the artistic temperament of the people
revert to Greece and Rome, as the light of their returning inspiration
and truth appeared with the dawn of the sixteenth century. Renaissance
architecture and Renaissance art swept Europe like a wave, and the
people turned with reactionary enthusiasm to the ancient standards of
art, as they did to the study of classic authors, and to the writing of
even Greek and Latin verses.

The debt of gratitude, therefore, which posterity has owed the
originators in ancient Greece of the three noble orders of
architecture—namely, the Doric, Ionic and Corinthian—can scarcely
be overestimated, for it is to those three orders or styles that
all subsequent architects have turned for the fundamental truths of
their art. They may not have followed each or all with conventional
strictness; but they have not succeeded in escaping from borrowing many
of the features there everlastingly fixed by the unerring geniuses of
classic times.

                              “Famous Greece!
    That source of art, and cultivated thought,
    Which they to Rome, and Romans hither brought.”

The uses to which the Greek and Roman architectural forms, principles
and ornaments have been put since the birth of the Renaissance have
broadened largely, and would seem to preclude any possibility of their
ever again falling into even partial desuetude. It is not only in
the more pretentious buildings, monuments and ornamental structures
that abound so plentifully in the populous and wealthy cities that
classic models and features are so liberally employed, but even the
unpretentious and simple rural homes cannot escape their use. What
is more common than the Doric mutule or Corinthian modillion, so
frequently seen in the cornices of modern houses, or the Ionic dentils
that show their teeth below a piazza roof or over the door casing of a
colonial dwelling? The various combinations of the fret, the egg and
dart, the bead and fillet, the honeysuckle, the acanthus and many other
Grecian _motifs_ of ornamentation, are met with constantly, not only in
buildings of a public or private nature, but in furniture and fresco,
in interior decoration, and in enhancing the attractiveness of almost
any article of use or ornament. Even the simple ogee moulding, which is
employed, if nowhere else, about the door panels of the humblest abode,
is classic in its origin, and had its archetype in the entablatures
of those stately and beautiful temples dedicated to the pagan gods of
ancient Greece.

It must not be inferred, however, that all the individual features
employed in the Greek orders found their birth in the brains of
Hellenic architects. Sir Jeremy Bentham says:

    “From Egypt arts their progress made to Greece,
     Wrapt in the fable of the Golden Fleece.”

This statement, however, though poetical, is much too sweeping to be
literally correct as to architecture. The Greeks borrowed a little—a
very little—not only from the Egyptians, but from the Assyrians, the
Chaldeans, the Persians, and other western Asiatic races as well; but
so altered what they had borrowed, so refined it and entwined it with
original conceptions of their own, that the captive features could
have returned again to their native lands without fear of detection.
Indeed as to the origin of some of the architectural features which
the Greeks are supposed to have taken from the countries of a more
unrefined people to the south and east of them, and especially as to
the volute, so conspicuous in the Ionic capital, which is supposed to
have been a Persian conception, there is much dispute.

Professor T. Roger Smith, of London, very truly observes: “We cannot
put a finger upon any feature of Egyptian, Assyrian or Persian
architecture the influence of which has survived to the present day,
except such as were adopted by the Greeks. On the other hand, there is
no feature, no ornament, nor even any principle of design which the
Greek architects employed that can be said to have now become obsolete.”

In discussing the three primary orders of which mention has been
made, and to which he adds the Tuscan and Composite, both of Italian
or Roman origin, and closely dependent upon the original three, Sir
William Chambers remarks: “The ingenuity of man has hitherto not
been able to produce a sixth order, though large premiums have been
offered, and numerous attempts been made by men of first-rate talents,
to accomplish it. Such is the fettered human imagination, such the
scanty store of its ideas, that Doric, Ionic and Corinthian have ever
floated uppermost, and all that has been produced amounts to nothing
more than different arrangements and combinations of their parts, with
some trifling deviations scarcely deserving notice; the whole tending
generally more to diminish than to increase the beauty of the ancient
orders.... The suppression of parts of the ancient orders, with a view
to produce novelty, has of late years been practised among us with
full as little success; and although it is not wished to restrain
sallies of imagination, nor to discourage genius from attempting to
invent, yet it is apprehended that attempts to alter the primary forms
invented by the ancients, and established by the concurring approbation
of many ages, must ever be attended with dangerous consequences, must
always be difficult, and seldom, if ever, successful.” Thus is seen the
marvellous discretion and judgment exercised by the Grecian architects
in selecting from contemporary art that alone which was best to
perpetuate, and thus is well expressed in the statement of indisputable
fact, a tribute to their originality and creative genius.

And who were these Old Masters of classic architecture—older in point
of service to their art by thousands of years than Giotto and Raphael
and Michael Angelo and Inigo Jones and Sir Christopher Wren, and many
others who might be mentioned, and who in campanile and cathedral,
in public building and private palace, in monument and mausoleum,
have proved themselves justly entitled to the laurels with which they
have been crowned, but who nevertheless are but disciples of Hellenic
and Roman masters? Where do we find the biographies of the original
Old Masters of architecture recorded? Where can we turn to read of
their lives, of their deeds and achievements, of their aspirations
and ambitions, of their shortcomings and their foibles? Where are
written down those anecdotes and incidents of personal interest, so
entertaining in association with their works or their art? What, in
fact, were their names? There is comparatively little recorded of the
lives of the Greek and Roman architects with which to answer these
questions; strange as it may appear, even their names are unfamiliar,
and in many important instances are forgotten altogether. Among that
large galaxy of brilliant men which Greece in her prime produced, who
figured prominently in almost every walk of life, who were great in
war and in peace, in philosophy and poetry, in satire and history,
in oratory and valor, and as great, if not greater than in all, in
statuary and sculpture—a galaxy clinging to the memory in all ages of
human progress, because never excelled, the name of a Grecian architect
is a strange sound, and does not ring in tune, if it is ever heard at
all, with the names enrolled upon the list of Greek immortals.

The sculptors and statuaries of ancient Greece are especially well
remembered in the popular mind, and Myron and Phidias and Praxiteles
and Polycletus call for no introduction to the ordinarily informed
lover of art; not so the designer of the Parthenon or the Temple of
Theseus, or the Erechtheum, or the Choragic monument of Lysicrates. It
is strange that the artist who modelled or chiselled a bull or a cow
or a Faun or a nude Venus, or any pagan god or goddess, however much
we may praise the excellence of his skill, should be remembered by
posterity, while the artist, his contemporary, who designed the most
beautiful and graceful buildings of all time, which in their glory were
the pride of their people, and which in their decay and ruin are still
the loadstones that attract pilgrims from the most distant lands, is
forgotten, and, it would appear, denied almost the humblest mention.
Can it not be said of the Grecian architects, as well as the Grecian
sculptors, that under the magic of their touch “Stones leap’d to form,
and rocks began to live”? Were not the temples they reared in all
the pride of surpassing beauty, which tempted the sculptor’s caress
on frieze and pediment, and which gave shelter to those works of the
statuary’s art which Shakespeare recalls so vividly when he draws the
simile:

                        “They spake not a word.
    But, like dumb statues, or unbreathing stones,
    Stared at each other, and look’d deadly pale,”

as much entitled to give immortality to their creators as the works,
however competitive, of other branches of art to their authors? And
still so incidentally and indifferently have the historians and
biographers of their time alluded to the Grecian architects, that
little or nothing is to be found to quench that desire to know of them
personally, which an interest in their grand achievements may well
awaken.

Did we not know it to be otherwise, we might think that they, too,
were like the poor architect of whom Goethe speaks: “He is employed
in lavishing all the luxury of his fancy upon halls from which he
is to be ever excluded, and display his ingenuity in bestowing the
utmost convenience upon apartments he must not enjoy.” But it does not
appear that any social discrimination was exercised against the Greek
architects to cast a shadow upon their present or future fame.

It is popularly believed that the great buildings of the ancient world
were very long in the process of construction—that they, in fact, took
many decades and sometimes even hundreds of years to complete. If this
were true it might in a measure explain the obscurity in which their
architects have been left, inasmuch as the original designer of the
building might have been forgotten ere the last of his successors had
finished the work he had undertaken. But this is not altogether the
fact. Even the pyramid of Cheops—that colossal marvel of the creative
genius of man—we are informed by some authorities took but thirty
years to construct, ten of which were given to the building of a
road leading to the site of the pyramid, for the greater facility in
handling the huge blocks of stone to be used. Neither were the temples
and public edifices of Greece and Rome, as a rule, long in building,
being generally undertaken and finished during the influential period
of a public man’s career, or the reign of a single emperor. There
were, of course, exceptions to this rule, as, for example, the temple
of Apollo at Delphi, that erected to Diana at Ephesus, and that
dedicated to Jupiter at Athens; but in nearly all such instances it
will be found that the temples were destroyed and rebuilt during the
long interval which is supposed to have passed from the time when
their foundations were first laid, to that which found them again in
all respects completed structures; or, if not destroyed and the work
undertaken anew, the delay was caused by some political influence which
contributed to check the continuous prosecution of the work, implying
no procrastination on the part of the original builders. But even in
the most of such cases the names of the various architects who were
from time to time associated with the work are at least known, if their
biographies are not more fully recorded.

It may be stated broadly that both the Greeks and the Romans were
rapid builders when the size of their edifices is taken into account.
Especially is this true of the time of Pericles, if we are to believe
the testimony of Plutarch: “Every architect strived to surpass the
magnificence of design with the elegance of execution, yet still
the most wonderful circumstance was the expedition with which they
[the buildings] were completed. Many edifices, each of which seemed
to require the labor of successive ages, were finished during the
administration of one prosperous man.” And the great biographer also
adds: “... Hence we have the more reason to wonder that the structures
raised by Pericles should be built in so short a time, and yet built
for ages, for each of them as soon as finished had the venerable air
of antiquity; so now they are old they have the freshness of a modern
building. A bloom is diffused over them which preserves their aspect
untarnished by time, as if they were animated by a spirit of perpetual
youth and unfading elegance.”

Another mistaken idea is that the sculptors of ancient times were also
architects. Some instances occur where, like the Italian, Michael
Angelo, a prominent sculptor of Greece or Rome, made architecture one
of his accomplishments, but they were not as numerous as they are
supposed to have been, and the rule seems to be the reverse: that the
sculptors of antiquity had no technical knowledge of architecture, and
that the arts were quite as distinctly practised as professions in
early times as they are to-day.

There remains to be presented only one other reason for the
indifference shown the early architects by their contemporary writers
and public, which is so well expressed by an English historian in his
discussion of the Coliseum at Rome, that it may well be quoted as a
type of the excuse offered by apologists of the same class: “The name
of the architect to whom the great work of the Coliseum was entrusted
has not come down to us.[1] The ancients seem themselves to have
regarded this name as a matter of little interest; nor in fact do they
generally care to specify the authorship of their most illustrious
buildings. The reason is obvious. The forms of ancient art in this
department were almost wholly conventional, and the limits of design
within which they were executed gave little room for the display of
original taste and special character.... It is only in periods of
eclecticism and Renaissance, when the taste of the architect has wider
scope and may lead the eye instead of following it, that interest
attaches to his personal merit. Thus it is that the Coliseum, the most
conspicuous type of Roman civilization, the monument which divides
the admiration of strangers in modern Rome with St. Peter’s itself,
is nameless and parentless, while every stage in the construction
of the great Christian temple, the creation of a modern revival, is
appropriated with jealous care to its special claimants.” In other
words, the pupil is a fitter artist to awaken the personal interest of
those who admire his works than his master; and the revived imitation
of more consequence to the public than the original model. If this
were true, why should the Coliseum, “the most conspicuous type of
Roman civilization,” upon which the pilgrims of the North, as we are
informed by Gibbon, based the longevity of Rome itself, when in their
rude enthusiasm they gave expression to the proverb, “As long as the
Coliseum stands, Rome shall stand; when the Coliseum falls, Rome will
fall; when Rome falls, the world will fall,” _divide_ the admiration of
the stranger with St. Peter’s? Should it not, rather, be subordinate
to the Christian cathedral of Bramante, Raphael and Michael Angelo?
Is there not a touch of the _reductio ad absurdum_ in this argument?
Such reasoning does not seem to be quite obvious upon other grounds
as well. If it is the fact that the ancients regarded the names of
their architects as of little interest, and their buildings as wholly
conventional, why does Vitruvius speak of four of the principal temples
of Greece as “having raised their architects to the summit of renown”?
Why is it that Rhœcus and Theodorus, Ictinus, Mnesicles, Dinocrates,
Detrianus, Apollodorus and many other architects—to whom more
particular mention will be made later—are remembered in ancient history
with more or less circumstantiality, not only in association with their
works—all conventional, if we are to accept this writer’s judgment—but
also on account of their individual merit, while the architects of the
buildings which departed most from that same conventionality, both in
plan and detail, as, for example, the Erechtheum, the original Odeon
of Pericles and even the Coliseum itself, where:

    “Firm Doric pillars formed the solid base,
     The fair Corinthian crown the higher space,
     And all below is strength, and all above is grace,”

are lost in the ocean of oblivion?

Do not our modern authors overlook the fact that the architects of
their own age share, as a rule, in the same popular indifference, and
that the period of revival is no exception to the period of inception;
that the one has inherited from the other not only the forms and
principles of its art, but the same neglect of its artists?

Whether this is true or not, the fact must remain and be accepted with
patience or impatience, as we please, that there is little preserved
for us by the ancient writers in respect to their architects. Two
rather conspicuous exceptions, however, occur to this general rule in
respect to Pausanias, the Lydian, and Vitruvius Pollio, the Roman.

Pausanias lived toward the close of the second century after Christ.
He was a great traveller and a close observer, his observations having
been confined principally to works of art, such as public buildings,
temples and statues, which he mentions in direct and simple language.
He visited most of the states of Greece at a time when that country
was still rich in her treasures of art, and what he has to say of what
he saw there would tend to indicate that while he was by no means a
critic or a connoisseur, he was still a faithful and minute recorder of
what appealed to his taste or excited his curiosity.

Vitruvius, however, was not only a writer on architecture, but a
professional architect as well, who resided in Rome about a century
earlier than Pausanias, or in the time of Augustus. He is practically
the only writer of his time who has given us technical information
concerning the ancient buildings. Vitruvius wrote his treatises upon
architecture at a very advanced age, and, it would appear, much in
defence of the pure Greek models which were even in that time being
corrupted. The frankness with which he hopes for fame by reason of his
book, and exposes his poverty as well as the unprofessional practices
of his brother architects, is not the least attractive feature of his
discourse: “But I, Cæsar,” he exclaims, “have not sought to amass
wealth by the practice of my art, having been contented with a small
fortune and reputation, than desirous of abundance accompanied by a
want of reputation. It is true I have acquired but little, yet I still
hope, by this publication, to become known to posterity. Neither is it
wonderful that I am known to but few. Other architects canvass and
go about soliciting employment, but my preceptors instilled into me
a sense of the propriety of being requested and not of requesting to
be entrusted, inasmuch the ingenuous man will blush and feel shame in
asking a favour; for the givers of a favour, and not the receivers,
are courted. What must he suspect who is solicited by another to be
entrusted with the expenditure of his money, but that it is done for
the sake of gain and emolument? Hence, the ancients entrusted their
works to those architects only who were of good family, and well
brought up, thinking it better to trust the modest than the bold and
arrogant man. These artists only instructed their own children or
relations, having regard to their integrity, so that property might be
safely committed to their charge. When, therefore, I see this noble
science in the hands of the unlearned and unskilful of men, not only
ignorant of architecture, but of everything relative to buildings, I
cannot blame proprietors who, relying on their own intelligence, are
their own architects; since, if the business is to be conducted by the
unskilful, there is at least more satisfaction in laying out money at
one’s own pleasure rather than at that of another person.”

Vitruvius also epitomized in his books on architecture much that had
been written prior to his time by his professional brethren of Greece
and Rome, and so preserved something of what otherwise might have been
entirely lost.

Allusion has been made to these two writers with some particularity,
for the reason that they will be more quoted than any others in the
course of this volume, but it must not be inferred that they are alone
responsible for all the knowledge which has come down to us respecting
the Greek and Roman architects, little and unsatisfactory as it is.

Although it has been shown that the historians and biographers of
ancient Greece made no attempt to treat architects with especial favor,
it would not be just, however, to close this chapter without quoting
from Homer to prove that lie, at least, could rank them as among those
who, by serving the people in the highest sense, were entitled to
unusual hospitality:

    “... What man goes ever forth
     To bid a stranger to his house, unless
     The stranger be of those whose office is
     To serve the people, be he seer, or leech,
     Or architect, or poet heaven-inspired,
     Whose song is gladly heard?...”


FOOTNOTES:

[1] There is an old ecclesiastical tradition, which is much doubted,
that the architect of the Coliseum was a Christian by the name of
Gaudentius, who suffered martyrdom in its arena, and that the services
of thousands of Jews contributed to its erection.




CHAPTER II.

THE MYTHICAL AND ARCHAIC ARCHITECTS AND BUILDERS.


History does not probe so deeply into the earliest annals of the races
that inhabited the Peloponnesian peninsula, that it does not show them
to have been pre-eminent as builders; nor does it follow the ancient
Greek people throughout the long ages that spanned their evolution and
decadence, that it does not find them in all the stages through which
they passed, leaving at least some of their walls, temples or monuments
to resist the ravages of all time, and the decaying influences of the
elements. They built, therefore, not only well, but perhaps better than
they knew, and have proved that if the creations of their intellects
were immortal, as we know, the works of their hands were not altogether
perishable.

The Pelasgic tribes, who were the first of which there is any record to
have inhabited Greece, were great wall-builders, and past-masters of
defensive architecture in those early ages. Although we may not have
the names of the individual architects among them, we have their racial
works still before us to evidence the fact that whoever the architects
were, they knew their business eminently well. The Acropolis at Athens
possesses the finest example that remains of Pelasgic mural work, in
the fortified retaining wall which surrounds it, and which is sometimes
called after the race that built it, the Pelasgicum.

It is claimed also by some authorities that the Pelasgi were the
original architects and builders of the “Long Walls” that connected
Athens with her seaport gates, and of such parts of the peribolus as
were not the authentic work of the builders under Themistocles and
Cimon, and subsequent architects to be hereafter mentioned.

The Cyclopes, who belonged to Pelasgic times, were likewise remarkable
wall-builders, lending their name to a kind of mural work in a manner
original with them, and having the attributes of great solidity and
endurance. The ruins of houses and other structures erected by them
have been found also at Tiryus and Mycenæ, on the plain of Argos.

Speaking of the circuit wall at Tiryus, Pausanias describes it as
being “composed of unwrought stones, each of which is so large that a
team of mules cannot even shake the smallest one;” and of Mycenæ, the
more important city, a short distance from Tiryus, where the circular
treasury of Atreus and other evidences of Cyclopean architecture have
been excavated by Dr. Henry Schliemann, Euripides asks the question:
“Do you call the city of Perseus the handiwork of the Cyclopes?”

Modern archæologists are inclined to the opinion that the Cyclopean
builders were not, as originally supposed, the one-eyed giants whom
Ulysses encountered in his voyages, as related in the Homeric legends,
but an entirely distinct Thracian tribe, which derived its name from
king Cyclops. After being expelled from Thrace, where were their early
homes, they migrated to Crete and Lycia; thence following the fortunes
of Prœtus, and giving him protection with the gigantic walls which
they constructed as against Acrisius, his twin brother, who was very
quarrelsome, as twin brothers not often are.

These Cyclopean walls, which are still to be found throughout Greece,
as already stated, and also in some parts of Italy, were made of
huge, uncut polygonous stones, sometimes twenty or thirty feet wide,
piled upon each other without cement, frequently irregularly, with
smaller stones filling up the interstices, but occasionally in regular
horizontal rows. There were, in fact, not only several kinds of these
walls, but several eras in which they were built as well.

It is not, however, the intention here to discuss the nature and extent
of the Pelasgic and Cyclopean constructions, it being sufficient to
recall the fact that so far as the Pelasgians generally are concerned,
they were not only the progenitors of most of the early architectural
monuments of eastern Europe, but were skilled in the arts and learned
in the fables of the gods as well, bequeathing both religious rites and
many arts to their children, the Greeks. It remains only to add, also,
that so closely were they identified with the art of building that it
is believed their very name is derived from their leading pursuit,
for it is thought that the term Pelasgi may be interpreted to mean
“stone-builders” or “stone-workers.”

In this allusion to the Pelasgians as builders, it was stated at the
outset that the names of the individual architects among them are
not known; this was perhaps unfair to Æacus, if he can be ranked as
an architect, and who is classed as a Pelasgian, although of divine
parentage.

Æacus was a son of Jupiter by Ægina, daughter of the river god, Asopus,
and, like the Cyclopeans, he was particularly expert in the matter of
walls. He was as well a very just and pious individual or myth, who
was frequently called upon to hold the scales of justice, not only
as between mortals, but also immortals. He was born on the Island
of Ægina, the temporary residence of his mother, after whom it was
named. At the time of his birth the island was uninhabited. This very
unpleasant condition of isolation for the mother and son was quickly
remedied by Jupiter, who changed the ants that abounded there into men,
placing Æacus over them as king.

Æacus always kept on the very best of terms with the gods, propitiating
them in many ways, and at last becoming a great favorite with them.
Indeed, so strong was his influence in celestial circles that at one
time when Greece was afflicted with a drought, in consequence of a
murder that had been committed, the Delphic oracle declared that
the only person who could help the situation at all was Æacus. He
was accordingly appealed to and persuaded to petition the gods for
relief. The result was that his petition was favorably answered. Æacus
thereupon erected a temple to Zeus Panhellenius on Mount Panhellenion
to show his gratitude, and possibly to keep himself in that position
where he might trespass upon the good-nature of his heavenly friends
again at some future time, should there be necessity.

Æacus surrounded his island with high walls to protect his people
against pirates. It is probable that these walls attracted the
admiration of Apollo and Neptune, and prompted them to retain the
professional services of their builder to assist them in erecting
the walls of Troy. But here it was that Æacus failed, for as one
diamond can only be accurately judged when placed in comparison with
another diamond, so Æacus, however successful he may have been as a
wall-builder by himself, was outclassed when he came into competition
with the occult knowledge of Apollo and Neptune.

The story is that when the Trojan walls were completed, three dragons
appeared and rushed upon them to test their strength. The two dragons
which attacked those parts of the walls built by the celestial
associates of Æacus had their heads broken for their pains, but the one
which flew at the mortal’s share of the work made a hole in the wall
which let it into the city. Apollo at once prophesied that Troy would
eventually fall through the hands of the Æacids, which prophecy, of
course, proved true. Whether this failure had anything to do with the
future of Æacus or not, it would be difficult to say, but the fact is
that after his death he became one of the three judges in Hades, with
special jurisdiction over the Europeans, which necessarily insured his
being overworked until the end of time.

With a people possessed of so large and varied an assortment of
deities, suited to every possible human need and shade of mortal
endeavor, it would be strange indeed if there was not some mythical or
legendary character among the Greek gods to preside over architecture,
if not as a distinct art, at all events in association with some of its
kindred branches. That the Greeks did not ignore such a necessity is
found to have been the case, and the great Dædalus rises most admirably
to the occasion in personifying the early infancy of architecture as
well as sculpture and wood-carving.

Dædalus, like most of his spiritual relations and associates, led a
life of much romance and adventure, not unmixed with hardship and
trial. He was either a native Athenian or Cretan, a point upon which
there is some dispute, as well as upon another involving his parentage.
It is perhaps sufficient to know that Dædalus flourished in the age of
Minos and Theseus, and was introduced more or less into the legends
pertaining to those two early characters.

It is upon Dædalus that responsibility must rest for the first
introduction of jealousy into the personality of artists, a vice,
by the way, which they have never been quite able to shake off from
his time to the present. Dædalus was rather sorely afflicted with
this unfortunate trait, and to its early exhibition is due much of
his subsequent misfortune. It was in connection with his devotion to
sculpture that his jealousy first involved him in trouble. He became
very expert as a carver generally, and undertook to instruct his nephew
Perdix in the art. In due time and under the careful tutorage of his
uncle, Perdix also became proficient, and in a moment of inspiration
is said to have invented that very useful tool of the mechanic, the
saw. This it was that excited Dædalus, who, in a fit of jealous rage,
threw his nephew over the Pelasgic walls of the Acropolis, killing him
instantly as he supposed.

Dædalus was, of course, condemned to death for this unseemly and
cruel manifestation of envy, but managed to escape and fly to Crete.
There his professional reputation had preceded him, and he obtained
the friendship of king Minos. In Crete he developed his latent
architectural skill, and built a very elaborate and intricate dwelling
for the hideous monster Minotaur, since known as the celebrated
labyrinth at Cnossus. The story of how Theseus, with the connivance of
Ariadne, the charming daughter of Minos, slew this monster, is one of
the most thrilling of the mythological legends, and is quite familiar.

Just how Dædalus incurred the displeasure of Minos does not seem to
be very clearly stated by the early authorities. It appears that he
was in some way entangled with the creation of a wooden cow, also with
Pasiphaë, the wife of Minos, and even with the birth of the horrible
Minotaur. Possibly it may have been Minos who this time became jealous.
However that may be, the friendship which had existed between Dædalus
and the king finally became strained, and the former was compelled to
fly the country, which he did in a very literal way, as king Minos
had seized all the ships on the coast of the island, cutting off,
in consequence, the only means of escape. The architect, however,
possessed much ingenuity and inventive genius of his own, even to a
more marked degree than that manifested by the nephew he had dropped
over the Athenian precipice, and with the aid of some feathers, a
little wax, and Pasiphaë, who secretly contributed her assistance, he
manufactured a pair of wings for himself, and another pair for his son,
Icarus, who was with him at the time. Thus it will be seen that the
first flying machines were invented by an architect.

[Illustration: THE FLIGHT OF DÆDALUS AND ICARUS.]

When the father and son started for Sicily, over the Ægean sea, like
a pair of huge birds, Dædalus flew conservatively and cautiously, being
careful not to rise too near the sun, where it was supposed by the
ancients to be very hot; but Icarus, with the spirit of youth and the
enjoyment of the exhilaration consequent upon the novelty of his method
of locomotion, gave a deaf ear to the protests of his father, and, in
emulation of Apollo, soared so high that the sun melted the wax in his
wings. His feathers flew off, and down he dropped into the waves below.
He was drowned, and that part of the Ægean sea into which he fell was
afterward called the Icarian sea, in commemoration of this unfortunate
accident, which Darwin has so well described in verse:

    “... With melting wax and loosened strings,
     Sunk hapless Icarus on unfaithful wings;
     Headlong he rushed through the affrighted air,
     With limbs distorted and dishevelled hair;
     His scattered plumage danced upon the wave,
     And sorrowing Nereids decked his watery grave.
     O’er his pale corse their pearly sea-flowers shed,
     And strewed with crimson moss his marble bed;
     Struck in their coral towers the passing bell,
     And wide in ocean tolled his echoing knell.”

Dædalus, who could not stop to rescue his son, continued steadily
on his course, and, attempting no experiments with his frail wings,
finally landed safely in Sicily, where he established himself again,
professionally, under the royal patronage of Cocalus, king of the
Sicani. Here he did most excellent work, until king Minos, his old
enemy, found him out, and began to make it unpleasant for him again.
Minos, hearing that Dædalus was in Sicily, sailed with a great fleet to
that island, but fortunately for the architect, his enemy was murdered
as soon as he arrived there by Cocalus or his daughter. In the mean
time Dædalus, anticipating the trouble that was in store for him, again
made an escape, this time to Sardinia, where he tarried a while, but
finally visited other countries, notably Egypt.

These are the substantial facts of Dædalus’s career, as contained in
the earlier legends, but later Greek writers tell a much more fanciful
and improbable story of his life, which there is no urgent necessity
to believe, as the one mentioned is quite fanciful enough and probably
more authentic. They say, among other things, that Dædalus was an
astrologer, and that he taught his son that science, who, soaring above
plain truths, lost his wits and was drowned in an abyss of difficulties.

Dædalus may have been an astrologer and may have been other things as
well, but that he was an architect cannot be doubted from the fact that
so many buildings are ascribed to him. Among his works may be mentioned
the Colymbethra, or reservoir in Sicily, from which the river Alabon
flowed into the sea; another an impregnable city near Agrigentum, in
which was the royal palace of Cocalus; still another a cave in the
territory of Selinus, in which the vapor arising from a subterranean
fire was received in such a way as to answer for a vapor bath. He
enlarged the summit of Mount Eryx for a foundation for the temple of
Venus, and he is said to have been the author of the temples of Apollo
at Capua and Cumæ, and the temple of Artemis Britomartis in Crete. In
Egypt he was the architect of a very beautiful propylæum, or vestibule
to the temple of Hephæstus at Memphis, for which he was rewarded by
being permitted to erect in it a statue of himself, the work of his own
hands.

As a sculptor he also executed many works of art—but the architectural
side of his career can only be considered here. It will not be out
of place, however, to mention some of the inventions ascribed to him
to assist the mechanic. It is claimed for him that he was an expert
carpenter, having been taught that trade by Minerva, and that he
originated the axe, the plumb-line, the auger and glue.

Dædalus, in fact, seems to have personified the earliest Grecian
art, and his name, which, when translated, signifies “ingenious,” or
“inventive,” stands for that period in Greece when form and shape and
expression were given inanimate substances by the use of tools and
mechanical appliances.

When Dædalus threw his nephew over the high walls of the Acropolis,
and naturally thought that he had killed him—an opinion in which it
is apparent the people of Athens shared—he was very much mistaken,
for Minerva, the patron goddess of the city, realizing what a great
mistake it would be to allow so bright and promising a young man to go
to an early death, exercised her magic, and saved him by changing the
falling artisan into a bird, which was given his name, “Perdix,” or, as
translated, Partridge.

To Perdix, who was especially skilful as a worker in wood, is
attributed, in addition to the invention of the saw, suggested to
him by the backbone of a fish or the teeth of a serpent, it would be
difficult to say which, the chisel, the compasses and the potter’s
wheel. Whether he invented any of these things after he became a
partridge or not is another mythical uncertainty, but probably not, as
his changed condition and feathers would have made it very awkward for
him to have done so, although most anything was possible in those days.

Perdix is also called Talos by some writers, and Pausanias mentions him
by still another name, Calos, and states that after his death he was
buried somewhere on the road leading from the theatre in Athens to the
Acropolis.

It might be interesting, but certainly a task beyond the scope of
this book, to mention all the mythical personages of the archaic or
early period of Grecian art, who were in a way more or less remote,
responsible for special features of artistic treatment that graced
the buildings of that time, such, for instance, as Dibutades, who was
the first to make masks on the edges of gutter tiles. Dibutades was
a sculptor, and the idea which he originated is said to have been
suggested to him by seeing his daughter trace the lines of her lover’s
profile around the shadow which it cast upon a wall. He filled in the
lines with clay, and, moulding it to the face, gave to the world the
art of modelling.

Among the artists belonging to the Dædalien, or legendary period of
Greece, who may be classed more distinctively as architects, however,
were Polycritus, who had to do with the building of the town of
Tanagra by Poemander, and Pteras, who was supposed to have been the
architect of the second temple to Apollo at Delphi. The legend is that
the first temple was made of branches of the wild laurel from Tempe,
and that Pteras constructed the second of wax and bees’ wings—rather
an unsubstantial building material, it might be inferred. Eucheir, a
painter, and Chersiphron and Smilis, architects and statuaries, are
also of this traditional period, and were representative of skill in
their arts.

All these names, however, although supposed to have been originally
purely mythological, were probably later assumed by or given to mortals
who were specially expert in the particular branch of art which the
name taken suggested. These individuals, to complicate matters, no
doubt, became entangled with the early mythological stories, and
finally lost their identity completely, or to such an extent as to make
it quite impossible to separate the fact from the fiction in their
respective cases.

An illustration of such a confusion is to be found in respect to the
architects, Rhœcus and Theodorus, who had to do with the building of
the temple of Hera at Samos, for the worship of which goddess Samos was
celebrated, and who, in association with Smilis, were the architects of
the labyrinth at Lemnos.

The writers who have mentioned these artists are quite numerous, and
have so differed in respect to their dates, and confounded the accounts
of their careers and achievements, that it is difficult to sift
anything like a satisfactory story from the confusion created. The
most probable deduction that has been made, however, is that Rhœcus
flourished about 640 B.C., and was a son of Phileas of Samos; that
Theodorus, the architect, was his son, and that another Theodorus, a
statuary, sometimes mistaken for the architect, was a nephew of the
architect Theodorus, the son of Telecles, also a gifted sculptor, and a
grandson of Rhœcus.

The temple of Hera, alluded to as the work of the father and son,
was three hundred and forty-four feet long by one hundred and sixty
feet wide, and, according to the “Antiquities of Ionia,” a decastyle,
dipteral structure, or possessed of a double row of columns composed of
ten columns in each row. Pausanias thinks that the temple was of very
great antiquity, a fact apparent to him from the statue of Hera which
it contained, which was made by Smilis, of wood, as were the early
statues of Greece.

The Lemnian labyrinth, according to Pliny, contained fifty columns
and innumerable statues, and had very remarkable massive gates,
so delicately poised that a child might open or shut them. Modern
travellers have had difficulty in finding any trace of this labyrinth,
although there is little doubt that it once existed. It is not to be
classed with the more visionary labyrinth in which the Minotaur was
caged.

It is claimed for both Rhœcus and Theodorus that they were the first
to invent the art of casting statues in bronze or iron, but as this
art was known before their time by the Phœnicians, it is likely that
they were responsible for nothing more than having introduced it into
Greece. This is probably true also of other early mythical characters
of Greece, to whom is attributed certain inventions in the arts which
have been found since to have existed much earlier than their time in
Egypt or elsewhere.

Theodorus is also credited with having been the architect of the old
Scias at Sparta, and of having advised the use of charcoal beneath the
foundation of the temple dedicated to Artemis, at Ephesus, as a remedy
against the dampness of the site. Theodorus was a great admirer of
his father and of the temple to Hera, which they built together. He
attested his appreciation of the latter by writing a book descriptive
of it.

As for Smilis, who belongs to the mythical period, and whose name when
translated stands for “a knife for carving wood,” or “a sculptor’s
chisel,” he is also accredited with having been the first to devise
the art of modelling in clay. He is to be classed more as a sculptor
than an architect, but of an inferior standing to Dædalus. In fact, his
only connection with architecture, according to Pliny, seems to have
been his association with Rhœcus and Theodorus in the building of the
labyrinth at Lemnos. It is possible that even here he was employed more
in the line of a sculptor than in lending any professional assistance
as an architect.

Pausanias mentions a pupil of Theodorus of Samos, who, it would appear,
achieved considerable distinction both as an architect and sculptor,
but more especially in the latter capacity. His name is given as
Gitiadas, and his birthplace as Lacedæmon, where he flourished about
724 B.C., as stated by some authorities, but much later according
to others. The architectural work for which he receives credit was
the temple of Athena Polionchos at Sparta, which, it is said, was
constructed entirely of bronze. It also contained a bronze statue
of the goddess of Gitiadas’s own workmanship, and many bas-reliefs
representing the labors of Hercules, the exploits of the Tyndarids,
Hephæstus releasing his mother from her chains, the Nymphs arming
Perseus for the expedition against Medusa, and other mythological
subjects, all executed in the same metal. This extensive use of bronze
suggested the name “Brazen House,” which was given the temple. It would
seem that Gitiadas was possessed of other accomplishments, and served
Minerva with equal distinction as a poet, writing his poems all in the
Doric dialect.

A still stranger _compôte_ of fact and fable, of hypothesis and
conjecture, of celestial and terrestrial biography, is to be found in
the accounts of the brothers Agamedes and Trophonius, who were the
architects of the great temple of Apollo at Delphi, and of the treasury
of Hyrieus, king of Hyria in Bœotia.

The temple to the beautiful and accomplished son of Jupiter and Latona,
the god of music and prophecy, as well as other things of equal or less
consequence, was the fourth to be erected upon the same site on Mount
Parnassus, in the ancient city of Delphi, known to the older poets as
Pytho, a name derived from the serpent Python which Apollo slew. In
this temple, which was the first of the four to be built with stone,
the others having been constructed out of the branches of the bay tree
and other equally perishable materials, dwelt the much respected and
frequently consulted Delphic Oracle. The spot in the temple from which
the prophetic vapor issued to inspire the priestess with second sight
was said to be the central point of the earth, and that where the two
eagles despatched by Jupiter to ascertain that point met and fell.

Pythia, the priestess of Apollo, who gave mouth to the oracles, sat on
a sacred tripod placed over the opening from which the vapor issued,
and gave forth her words of wisdom in prose or poetry as the occasion
demanded. If in prose, her prognostications would be immediately
verified, and if in verse some time must elapse before they could be
fulfilled. Pythia was not always on duty, but could be consulted only
on certain days during the month of Busius in the spring.

There is no doubt but that she made some very remarkable prophecies,
but, alas! it is also recorded that, like some of the political oracles
of these degenerate times, her prophetic vision was not infrequently
influenced by “a previous interview.” A notable case of this kind was
that in which the Alemæonidæ were entangled; who for political reasons
and effect rebuilt the same temple after it was destroyed by fire in
the year 548 B.C., as we shall see later.

But we have drifted from the subject. It is claimed by some that
Agamedes was the son of Stymphalus, who was murdered and had his body
cut up in pieces, and a grandson of the old ancestor of the Arcadian
Arcas, who in turn was a son of Zeus. Others say that the father of
Agamedes was Apollo, and his mother was Epicaste, and still others
are of the opinion that his parents were none other than Zeus himself
and Iocaste, another name for Epicaste, and that Trophonius was his
son. All this genealogy is, however, disturbed if we accept the more
probable one, that he was a son of Erginus, king of Orchomenus, and
that he was a brother of Trophonius. By the way, Trophonius is also
said to have been a son of Apollo. When these two young men attained
to manhood they became very expert in the art of building temples
to the gods and palaces for kings. Thus having established enviable
reputations in their profession, they were retained to plan and
supervise the works mentioned.

It is in respect to these architects that the first authentic account
of a misunderstanding as to professional compensation is related.
It must not be thought that because some of the early architects
were related to the nobility of Mount Olympus, they were any the
less mercenary than are architects in our own time, or were any more
inclined to work for nothing than are their professional descendants of
to-day.

Plutarch tells us that Agamedes and Trophonius, after working hard upon
the Delphic temple, and not receiving any pay, began to lose faith in
the mortals who were backing the undertaking. As they grew more and
more dubious about their compensation, and possibly having notes or
bills to meet, they finally decided to appeal directly to Apollo, in
whose glorification the shrine had been built.

Apollo, who was consulted through the Delphic Oracle, informed them
that he must have time to think the matter over. In other words, he
could not be hurried in his decision, but would give them an answer
at the end of seven days. It is not unlikely that the Oracle saw an
occasion here where it might be a matter of financial prudence to
consult with the other side before rendering a decision. However that
may be, the two architects were told that Apollo wished that they
should spend the intervening time in “festive indulgence.” Thinking
from this, quite naturally, that they were in the good graces of the
god, and suspecting no ungodly duplicity, Agamedes and Trophonius set
about to enjoy themselves according to the most liberal interpretation
of their instructions. The result was that at the end of the seventh
day they were found dead in their beds, whether from too much festivity
on their part or too much duplicity on the part of the Oracle, no one
knows, but the inference is conclusive that as they were dead it was
not necessary to give them the professional compensation they had been
so anxiously demanding.

Cicero tells the story a little differently, and eliminates the
question of compensation from it. He says that they consulted Apollo
to know what in his opinion was “best for man”? This being a much
easier question to handle, Apollo took but three days to answer it, but
the consequences of the consultation to poor Agamedes and Trophonius
were quite as disastrous. It may be that, taking everything into
consideration, it is best for man to be dead, but most architects don’t
think so, and had Agamedes and Trophonius anticipated such an answer,
it is probable that they would have asked no questions.

Pausanias relates an altogether different legend and connects it with
the treasury of Hyrieus, which Agamedes and Trophonius built, instead
of with the temple of Apollo. The story by Pausanias would tend to show
that these architects were even more mercenary than Plutarch has given
us to understand they were.

It seems that in constructing the treasury they contrived to have a
stone so placed that it could be taken away from the outside of the
building at any time, and thus offer an entrance to the vaults. No one
of course had any knowledge of this secret entrance but themselves. In
consequence, after the building was finished, and it was used for the
purpose for which it was intended, these two covetous brothers carried
away from time to time goodly portions of the treasure as it was
deposited. The king soon heard that there was a leak in his treasury,
and that he was losing money rapidly. He was naturally annoyed and much
perplexed when he found that the locks and seals of his treasure house
remained intact and uninjured. He thereupon set a trap to catch the
thief. Just what kind of a trap it was is not explained, but after some
little time Agamedes was caught, and Trophonius, finding his brother
ensnared, cut off his head, to save his own, doubtless, and prevent the
discovery of his association in the robbery. This very unfraternal act
of Trophonius was not allowed to go unpunished, however, and Apollo, or
some other god, caused him to be swallowed up in the grove of Lebadea.

Pausanias further states that Erginus, the father of Agamedes, was
known as the “Protector of Labor,” that Trophonius was called the
“Nourisher,” and that Agamedes had the reputation of being the “Very
Prudent One.” There can be no doubt about Agamedes’s prudence, such as
it was.

Trophonius, it appears, had a still further career after his death, as
an oracle, conducting his business from the spot where he was swallowed
up in Lebadea. He was especially prophetic in matters relating to
futurity. Those desiring to consult him were conducted to a cavern,
and furnished with a ladder, by means of which they could descend
into it. They were then given the information for which they were in
quest, either by means of their eyes, or their ears, or such of their
senses as the occasion seemed best to suggest. Some say that one of
these visitors, after having gone into the cave, and being treated in
this way by the oracle, returned never to smile again; but Pausanias
contradicts the story.

There is another belief in regard to these architects which must be
simply alluded to. It is that Agamedes and Trophonius were deities of
the Pelasgian times; that Trophonius was a giver of food from the bosom
of the earth, and for that reason was worshipped in a cavern, and that
Agamedes was not the wretched thief of Pausanias, but, on the contrary,
a very generous character, who gave liberally from underground
granaries.

A parallel to the story of the robbery of the treasury of Hyrieus by
Agamedes and Trophonius is told by Herodotus in respect to the two sons
of the builder of the treasury of the Egyptian king Rhampsinitus. These
two young men, it seems, were also caught, while pilfering, in a trap,
described with great circumstantiality by the “Father of History.”




CHAPTER III.

THE ORIGINATORS OF THE THREE ORDERS.


Who were the originators of the three great and primary orders of
Grecian architecture is still a question which the discussion of the
legendary and mythical architects, which has been briefly entered into,
has not answered. It may be assumed inferentially that as the earliest
of the Greek temples which have been referred to as the works of the
progeny of the gods were in the Doric style, the pagan deities of
Greece may claim some share of credit for having introduced that noble
design to the world. The Ionic and Corinthian styles, however, are
still to be accounted for, and as there is good ground to assume that
they made their advent into architectural art at much later dates no
celestial origin can be claimed for them.

Vitruvius, in relating his account of the origin of all three orders,
alludes more directly to the birth of the Doric, and tells a story
so picturesque and entertaining of the other two that although
recognizing how well it may be known to the professional architect, it
is difficult to resist the temptation to give it here entire:

“Dorus, the son of Hellen, and the nymph Orseis, reigned over the whole
of Achaia and Peloponnesus, and built at Argos, an ancient city, on a
spot sacred to Juno, a temple which happened to be of this order. After
this many temples similar to it sprung up in the other parts of Achaia,
though the proportions which should be preserved in it were not as yet
settled.

“But afterward when the Athenians, by the advice of the Delphic Oracle
in a general assembly of the different states of Greece, sent over into
Asia thirteen colonies at once, and appointed a governor or leader
to each, reserving the chief command for Ion, the son of Xuthus and
Creusa, whom the Delphic Apollo had acknowledged as son, that person
led them over into Asia, and occupied the borders of Caria, and there
built the great cities of Ephesus, Miletus, Myus (which was long since
destroyed by inundation, and its sacred rites and suffrages transferred
by the Ionians to the inhabitants of Miletus), Priene, Samos, Teos,
Colophon, Chios, Erythræ, Phocæa, Clazomenæ, Lebedos and Melite. The
last, as a punishment for the arrogance of its citizens, was detached
from the other states in a war levied pursuant to the directions of
a general council; and in its place, as a mark of favor toward King
Attalus and Arsinoë, the city of Smyrna was admitted into the number
of Ionian states, which received the appellation of Ionian from their
leader Ion, after the Carians and Lelegæ had been driven out.

“In this country, allotting different spots for sacred purposes, they
began to erect temples, the first of which was dedicated to Apollo
Panionios, and resembled that which they had seen in Achaia, and they
gave it the name of Doric, because they had first seen that species in
the cities of Doria. As they wished to erect this temple with columns,
and had not a knowledge of the proper proportions of them, nor knew the
way in which they ought to be constructed, so as at the same time to be
both fit to carry the superincumbent weight and to produce a beautiful
effect, they measured a man’s foot, and, finding its length the sixth
part of his height, they gave the column a similar proportion—that is,
they made its height, including the capital, six times the thickness
of the shaft, measured at the base. Thus the Doric order obtained its
proportion, its strength, and its beauty from the human figure.

“Under similar notions they afterward built the temple of Diana, but
in that, seeking a new proportion, they used the female figure as
the standard; and for the purpose of producing a more lofty effect
they first made it eight times its thickness in height. Under it they
placed a base, after the manner of a shoe to the foot; they also added
volutes to its capital, like graceful, curling hair, on each side, and
the front they ornamented with cymatia and festoons in the place of
hair. On the shafts they sunk channels, which bear a resemblance to the
folds of a matronal garment. Thus two orders were invented, one of a
masculine character, without ornament, the other bearing a character
which resembled the delicacy, ornament and proportion of a female.

“The successors of these people, improving in taste, and preferring a
more slender proportion, assigned seven diameters to the height of the
Doric column and eight and a half to the Ionic. That species, of which
the Ionians were the inventors, has received the appellation of Ionic.

[Illustration: THE ORIGIN OF THE CORINTHIAN CAPITAL.]

“The third species, which is called Corinthian, resembles in its
character the graceful and elegant appearance of a virgin, in whom,
from her tender age, the limbs are of a more delicate form, and whose
ornaments should be unobtrusive. The invention of the capital of this
order is said to be founded on the following occurrence: A Corinthian
virgin, of a marriageable age, fell a victim to a violent disorder.
After her interment her nurse, collecting in a basket those articles
to which she had shown a partiality when alive, carried them to her
tomb, and placed a tile on the basket for the longer preservation
of its contents. The basket was accidentally placed on the root of
an acanthus plant, which, pressed by the weight, shot forth, toward
spring, its stems and large foliage, and in the course of its growth
reached the angles of the tile, and thus formed volutes at the
extremities. Callimachus, who for his great ingenuity and taste was
called by the Athenians Catetechnos, happening at this time to pass by
the tomb, observed the basket and the delicacy of the foliage which
surrounded it. Pleased with the form and novelty of the combination, he
constructed from the hint thus afforded columns of this species in the
country about Corinth.”

The comments of Sir Henry Wotton in his “Elements of Architecture,”
written in England during the latter part of the sixteenth century,
upon this legendary account of the source of the three orders given
by Vitruvius, are sufficiently attractive and quaint in language and
spelling to warrant their being quoted also:

“The Dorique order is the gravest that hath been received into civil
use, preserving in comparison of those that follow a more _masculine
aspect_ and little trimmer than the Tuscan that went before, save a
sober garnishment now and then of _lions’ heads_ in the _cornice_ and
of _triglyph_ and _metopes_ always in the _frize_.... To discern him
will be a piece rather of good _heraldry_ than of _architecture_, for
he is knowne by his place when he is in company and by the peculiar
ornament of his _frize_, before mentioned, when he is alone.... The
_Ionique order_ doth represent a kind of feminine slenderness; yet,
saith Vitruvius, not like a housewife, but in a decent dressing hath
much of the _matrone_.... Best known by his trimmings for the bodie
of this _columne_ is perpetually _chaneled_, like a thick-pleighted
gowne. The _capitall_, dressed on each side, not much unlike women’s
wires, in a spiral wreathing, which they call the _Ionian voluta_....
The _Corinthian_ is a columne lasciviously decked like a courtezan, and
therefore in much participating (as all inventions do) of the place
where they were first born, Corinth having beene, without controversie,
one of the wantonest towns in the world.”

As for the Composite order, which, as has been already stated, is but a
mixture of the Ionic and Corinthian, it would seem that Sir Henry has
very little patience. He says with a contempt which he makes little
effort to conceal: “The last is the _compounded order_, his _name_
being a briefe of his _nature_: for his pillar is nothing in effect but
a _medlie_, or an _amasse_ of all the preceding _ornaments_, making
a new kinde of stealth, and though the most richly tricked, yet the
poorest in this, that he is a borrower of his beautie.”

There are those who in relentless search for truth at the expense of
sentiment and poetry would spoil the pretty story which Vitruvius tells
of the invention of the Corinthian capital by claiming for Egypt the
distinction of being the mother-country of the order, and ascribing to
that form of the Egyptian capital that bells out toward the abacus, and
which is surrounded by open lotus leaves, as the archetype of the last
of the three Grecian orders. There is, however, more probability to the
story of Callimachus than there is similarity between the Egyptian and
Corinthian capitals, in our opinion.

If we accept Callimachus as the originator of the Corinthian, although
there does not appear any name of an architect to receive the
individual credit for the invention of the Doric order, we may as well
accept the deduction which Vitruvius draws in respect to Hermogenes,
an Ionian architect, who is said to have flourished about 600 B.C.,
and credit him at the same time with being the first to introduce
the feminine proportions and attributes into his art, and with having
perfected, if he did not originate, the queenly Ionic order.

“When Hermogenes was employed to erect the temple of Bacchus at
Teos,” says Vitruvius, “the marble was prepared for one in the Doric
style; but the architect changed his mind, from the idea that other
proportions, afterward called Ionic, were more suitable for the
purpose, almost inducing the inference that Hermogenes was the inventor
of those delicate proportions; he appears unquestionably to have
displayed great skill and ingenuity in all his designs, and to have
entertained the opinion that sacred buildings should not be constructed
with Doric proportions, as they obliged the adoption of false and
incongruous arrangements.”

Another fact which Vitruvius does not touch upon might tend to point
to Hermogenes as the originator of the Ionic order. He was a native of
Alabanda in Caria, and if it is true, as some authorities believe, the
volute was an ornament in early use in Asia Minor, he was doubtless
familiar with it; and, appreciating its graceful possibilities,
introduced it into the matronly Ionic.

Hermogenes is conceded to have been one of the most celebrated
architects of antiquity. In addition to the temple of Bacchus which
he designed for Teos, one of the eastern Ionian cities, and the
birthplace of Anacreon, as well as other noted ancient characters, he
erected in the city of Magnesia, in Lydia, a temple to Diana in the
Doric order. About each of these temples he wrote a book, both of which
were still in existence in the time of Augustus. In one he described
the temple to Diana as a pseudodipteral, or false dipteral temple, a
form which he invented. It is called false or imperfect because of
the economy of the inside row of columns on each of the long sides of
the cell, the outside row being allowed to remain. The effect from a
distance was the same as a double row, while considerable expense was
saved. The temple to Bacchus he described as a monopterus, or a round
temple, having neither walls nor cell, but merely a roof sustained by
columns.

Hermogenes’s great ambition appears to have been a desire to foster
and encourage the use of the Ionic order in preference to the Doric
for temple construction. In this opinion he was later sustained by
Tarchesius, another writer on architecture, who may be dated as
sometime later than 470 B.C., and by Pytheus, whom we shall meet again
as one of the architects of the tomb of Mausolus.

Although Vitruvius mentions the origin of the Corinthian order in close
connection with that of the Doric and Ionic, it must be borne in mind
that Callimachus, whom he credits with the Corinthian, was a much
later artist than Hermogenes. The use of the Corinthian column by the
architect Scopas in the temple of Athene at Tegea in 396 B.C., has led
to the inference that Callimachus must have lived prior to that date,
and the fact that he gave to that style of architecture the appellation
of Corinthian, that he was a native of Corinth. Lübke, in his “Outlines
of the History of Art,” however, does not give to Callimachus the full
and undisputed credit for originating the Corinthian style, claiming
that the order existed before his time, although he does not mention
when or where. Lübke would interpret the story of Callimachus and the
basket as meaning that it was he who gave to the capital its final
perfection. It is somewhat strange also that although Callimachus is
conceded to have been the first to develop this order, if he did not
absolutely invent it, there is no mention of any building having been
designed by him in the Corinthian style.

There seems to be little dispute over the fact that Callimachus was
neither as a sculptor nor an architect to be placed in the van of the
distinguished artists of early Greece. As a sculptor, in which capacity
he is best known by his works, his style was stilted and artificial,
rendered so by the artist’s disposition to be finicky and fastidious in
his execution. Indeed, he is said to have been unwearied in polishing
and perfecting, and to have sacrificed the grand and sublime in the
exercise of too great refinement and purity. Callimachus was never
satisfied with himself, and possibly on that account others were not
satisfied with him, as a certain degree of self-esteem is necessary
to invite public approval. The Greeks gave him a name, based upon his
peculiarities, which Pliny has translated as “_Calumniator Sui_.” His
faculty for invention was evidenced in other respects also, as he is
credited with having originated the art of boring marble, and Pausanius
describes a golden lamp which he invented, and which he dedicated to
Athene, which when filled with oil burned exactly a year without going
out.

It may be said broadly of the Grecian people in their employment of
the three grand orders of architecture that the first two—namely, the
Doric and Ionic—more closely harmonized with the dignity and nobility
of their national character. In fact, Greece arrived at the pinnacle
of her civilization and brought her philosophy of human existence not
only in theory, but in practice, to its highest ideals before the
Corinthian order of architecture appeared to claim a share in her
artistic reputation. The stately solidity of the Doric and the graceful
purity of the Ionic lent the perfection of architectural framework to
the mental strength and loftiness of ideal of the Hellenic people. They
seemed to accord with the philosophy that was originally preached from
under the shadow of their pediments and entablatures. We can almost
see the doubting and mystified Theon stepping from the Doric portico
where Zeno held forth, to compare that philosopher’s stoical dogmas
with the doctrines of Prudence preached in the Ionic-encompassed garden
of Epicurus, by a philosopher ever destined to be misconstrued and
wrongfully interpreted.

“All learning is useful,” taught Epicurus; “all the sciences are
curious; all the arts are beautiful; but more useful, more curious
and more beautiful is the perfect knowledge and perfect government
of ourselves. Though a man should read the heavens, unravel their
laws and their revolutions; though he should dive into the mysteries
of matter, and expound the phenomena of the earth and air; though he
should be conversant with all the writings and sayings and actions of
the dead; though he should hold the pencil of Parrhasius, the chisel
of Polycletus or the lyre of Pindar; though he should be one or all of
these things, yet not know the secret springs of his own mind, the
foundation of his opinions, the motives of his actions; if he hold
not the rein over his passions; if he have not cleared the mist of
all prejudice from his understanding; if he have not rubbed off all
intolerance from his judgments; if he know not to weigh his own actions
and the actions of others in the balance of justice, that man hath not
knowledge, nor, though he be a man of science, a man of learning or
an artist, he is not a sage. He must sit down patient at the feet of
Philosophy. With all his learning he hath yet to learn, and perhaps a
harder task, he hath to _un_learn.”

The Corinthian order, on the other hand, notwithstanding all its
charm, beauty and variety, seemed to lack that steadfastness of
character which bound so firmly the other two orders to the hearts of
the Grecian people, and was never admitted into their fullest trust
and confidence. Indeed, it is generally conceded that the Corinthian
model grew in favor as the architectural art of Greece declined; and
only when Greece, losing her autonomy, began to lose her ambition and
intellectual greatness and independence. It reached its fullest vogue
with the later or Greco-Roman architects, who sacrificed much of purity
in art for lavish and sightly display. With the Greeks the Corinthian
was sparingly employed, and generally called upon for their smaller
and less important buildings; on the other hand, with the Romans,
enriched by additional features and ornamentation of their own, it
became the favorite order, not alone for portico and temple, but for
public and private buildings of every nature.

[Illustration: Three columns]




CHAPTER IV.

EARLY GRECIAN ARCHITECTS.


In the year 548 B.C. the great temple to Apollo at Delphi, the work
of the legendary architects Agamedes and Trophonius, was destroyed by
fire. Of the four temples to the same deity that had been reared upon
the same site, this was the first in which marble was employed as a
building material. Naturally the question will present itself, how
could a temple built of marble be destroyed by fire? The answer is,
that while the main walls of the cell and the columns, entablatures,
pediments and other exposed parts of the early Greek temples were built
of marble, stone or sun-dried bricks, the roofs were generally of wood,
and were heavily timbered, sometimes calling for great strength to
support marble tiles. Much of the interior building material was also
of wood, as well as the statuary with which the earlier temples were
lavished and enriched. Thus if fire was started within the building,
either by accident or, as not infrequently happened, by the hand of an
incendiary, there was sufficient combustible material for it to feed
upon and to heat the entire structure, reducing the otherwise enduring
marble to crumbling lime.

The temple of Apollo having been thus destroyed, the much revered
and highly respected Oracle was left without shelter and a place of
business. This state of things of course could not long be allowed to
continue, and the Amphictyons, a legislative body, having under its
special care the Delphic temple, at once came to the front and ordered
a new temple built at a cost of about $300,000. One-fourth of this sum
was to be paid by the Delphians and the remaining three-fourths were to
be contributed by the other cities of Greece and those nations which
were in the habit of consulting the Oracle—a very proper distribution
of the expense, considering how extensive and widespread was the renown
and appreciation of the priestess. Amasis, King of Egypt, volunteered
a thousand talents of alumina, thus showing what his feelings were in
the matter, and the Alcmæonidæ, one of the oldest and most aristocratic
families of Athens, undertook the contract, it is hinted, mainly for
political reasons. This may be true, as they were much involved in
local politics, especially with the banishment of Pisistratus, the
tyrant, and they may have seen an opportunity in the rebuilding of
this temple to make themselves very popular. They certainly went about
it in the right way to achieve such a result, and did actually gain
much influence by their generosity and the broadminded manner in which
they disregarded the strict terms of the contract to do handsomer and
better work than it called for. One particular illustration of their
liberality has attracted the attention of the historian: it was the
building of the temple in Parian marble, instead of Porine stone. While
the Alcmæonidæ were prosecuting the work in this generous spirit, they
did not neglect their fallen enemies, the Pisistratidæ, and threw out
occasional innuendoes to the effect that the Pisistratidæ could tell
more about the origin of the fire that destroyed the late temple than
they evidently cared to, thereby intimating a crime as against their
rivals that it might have been difficult to have proved. They even won
the Oracle to their side by similar simple and ingenuous methods, with
the result that ever afterward the Oracle did not hesitate to speak a
kind word for the Alcmæonidæ and favor their native city, Athens.

The architect of this new temple was Spintharus, a Corinthian. As
nothing further seems to be known of him, we have been somewhat
particular to mention the importance of this work, to show that
Spintharus was an artist who stood very high in his profession at
the time. But as the temple was one of the longest in process of
construction, taking about seventy-two years to complete, it is not
likely that Spintharus lived to enjoy the full fruition of his work.

It may be of interest to add that no structure of its kind throughout
all Greece was made the depository of richer or more extensive treasure
than this temple to Apollo at Delphi, a fact not to be marvelled at
if we do not lose sight of the Oracle. We have already seen how it
excited the cupidity of the brothers Agamedes and Trophonius. What they
appropriated to themselves from the rich vaults of its predecessor was,
however, comparatively insignificant to the wholesale robberies that
went on from time to time of the fifth temple designed by Spintharus.
Herodotus says that the wealth of Delphi was better known to the
Persian Xerxes than were the contents of his own palace, and that after
forcing the pass of Thermopylæ he detached a portion of his army to
capture Delphi. It failed to do so, only through the interposition
of the Oracle or some other deity. Many years afterward the Phocians
plundered the temple of what might be represented by $10,600,000 of our
money. Still later the Gauls also made a rich haul, which the Romans
afterward found in their city of Tolosa unexpended, probably because
there was so much of it; and Nero is said to have taken from it five
hundred bronze statues at one time.

But these robberies fade into insignificance when the insult heaped
upon the Delphians and their Oracle by Constantine the Great is
recalled. This Roman vandal not only removed the sacred Tripod and
Brazen Column which supported it, but degenerated their use to the
adornment of the hippodrome of the new city he built on the Bosphorus.
The Brazen Column may still be seen in Constantinople, but the sacred
Tripod has disappeared forever. There is a little story connected with
a first disappearance of the Tripod that may be worth the telling. It
was lost at sea, but afterward recovered by some fishermen. When Pythia
was asked to decide to whom it should be given, her answer was that it
should be bestowed upon the wisest man in Greece. Accordingly it was
sent to Thales of Miletos. He, however, was too modest to retain it,
and passed it over to Bias as a wiser man; Bias was also embarrassed
by the selection, and presented it to another of the Grecian sages; he
to still another, and so on, until it had made the circuit of pretty
much every person in Greece with any claim at all to superior wisdom.
Finally, however, it came back once more to Thales, who successfully
ended its itinerary by dedicating it to the Delphic Apollo.

One of the earliest of the great temples to be erected in the Ionic
order was that begun in the Ionian city of Ephesus in Asiatic Greece
by Ctesiphon, a Cretan architect born in Cnossus, and his son,
Metagenes. This temple was erected to the glory of the many-breasted
and mummy-like appearing Artemis, a goddess peculiar to the Ephesians,
whom the Greek colonists there doubtless inherited from the Asiatic
races that preceded them in their Ionian settlement. There was nothing
of the graceful, virgin-like characteristics of Apollo’s sister, the
Arcadian Artemis, in this Ephesian goddess, but the Ionian Greeks were
quite partial to her, attended her with eunuch priests, and built in
her honor this temple, so grand and magnificent that it was regarded as
one of the seven wonders of the world.

Before alluding to some of the interesting facts that have been
preserved concerning the early history of this great temple it may
not be out of place to touch upon a custom which prevailed in Ephesus
in respect to the employment of architects, which Vitruvius relates.
He says: “In the magnificent and spacious Grecian city of Ephesus an
ancient law was made by the ancestors of the inhabitants, hard in its
nature, but nevertheless equitable. When an architect was entrusted
with the execution of a public work, an estimate thereof being lodged
in the hands of a magistrate, his property was held as security until
the work was finished. If, when finished, the expense did not exceed
the estimate, he was complimented with decrees and honors. So when
the excess did not amount to more than a fourth part of the original
estimate, it was defrayed by the public, and no punishment was
inflicted. But when more than one-fourth the estimate was exceeded, he
was required to pay the excess out of his own pocket.”

The honest Vitruvius almost sighs as he adds: “Would to God that such
a law existed among the Roman people, not only in respect to their
public, but also of their private buildings, for then the unskilful
could not commit their depredations with impunity, and those who were
most skilful in the intricacies of the art would follow the profession!
Proprietors would not be led into an extravagant expenditure, so as
to cause ruin; architects themselves, from the dread of punishment,
would be more careful in their calculations, and the proprietor would
complete his building for that sum or a little more, which he could
afford to expend. Those who can conveniently expend a given sum on
any work with the pleasing expectation of seeing it completed would
cheerfully add one-fourth more; but when they find themselves burdened
with the addition of half or even more than half of the expense
originally contemplated, losing their spirits and sacrificing what has
already been laid out, they incline to desist from its completion.”

There are, perhaps, some people even at the present time who can be
found to echo these sentiments of Vitruvius, and exclaim: Would to God
that such a law existed among the American people, especially in New
York and Chicago!

Theodorus of Samos, it will be remembered, laid the foundation of the
temple to Artemis of Ephesus in the year 600 B.C. To guard against the
destruction of the temple by earthquakes, a marshy site was chosen,
and Theodorus insured a firm foundation, by using charcoal, which was
rammed down solidly, and then covered with fleeces of wool. Ctesiphon
and his son did not, however, begin the superstructure until about
forty years later.

The dimensions of the building were very extensive, and although
the architecture was full of grandeur, grace and beauty were not
sacrificed. The length was four hundred and twenty-five feet; the
width two hundred and twenty feet. One hundred and twenty-seven
Parian marble columns, each sixty feet in height, surrounded the cell
in double rows, sixteen appearing in the front and rear façades, and
forty each on the sides. Herodotus states that most of these columns
were presented by the rich Crœsus, and some by other kings. The cell,
according to some authorities, was devoid of a roof, but Mr. Wood,
in his “Discoveries at Ephesus,” indicates otherwise. The whole
edifice, both exteriorly and interiorly, presented great richness and
elaboration of carving. The shafts of the columns in front of the
building were carved in relief, in three broad bands, to nearly half
their height, and those in the rear, in one band, to about one-quarter
of their height. The frieze and pediments were also worked out by the
chisel of the sculptor in designs of great and imposing beauty.

Many of the stones used in the building were very massive. An idea
of how huge some of these blocks were may be gathered from the fact
that the architrave alone contained pieces of marble thirty feet
long, and that Ctesiphon and Metagenes were forced to invent special
machinery and contrivances to convey the stones for the columns to the
building from the quarry eight miles distant. Vitruvius explains these
contrivances as follows: “He [Ctesiphon] made a frame of four pieces
of timber, two of which were equal in length to the shafts of the
columns, and were held together by the two transverse pieces. In each
end of the shaft he inserted iron pivots, whose ends were dovetailed
thereinto, and run with lead. The pivots worked in gudgeons fastened
to the timber frame, whereto were attached oaken shafts. The pivots
having a free revolution in the gudgeons, when the oxen were attached
and drew the frame, the shafts rolled round, and might have been
conveyed to any distance. The shafts having been thus transported, the
entablatures were to be removed, when Metagenes, the son of Ctesiphon,
applied the principle upon which the shafts had been conveyed to
the removal of those also. He constructed wheels about twelve feet
in diameter, and fixed the ends of the blocks of stone whereof the
entablature was composed into them; pivots and gudgeons were then
prepared to receive them in the manner just described, so that when the
oxen drew the machine the pivots, turning in the gudgeons, caused the
wheels to revolve, and thus the blocks, being enclosed like axles in
the wheels, were brought to the work without delay. An example of this
species of machine may be seen in the rolling stone used for smoothing
the walks in palæstræ. But the method would not have been practicable
for any considerable distance. From the quarries to the temple is a
length of not more than eight thousand feet, and the interval is a
plain without any declivity. Within our own time, when the base of the
colossal statue of Apollo in the temple of that god was decayed through
age, to prevent the fall and destruction of it, a contract for a base
from the same quarry was made with Pæonius. It was twelve feet long,
eight feet wide, and six feet high. Pæonius, driven to an expedient,
did not use the same as Metagenes did, but constructed a machine for
the purpose by a different application of the same principle. He made
two wheels about fifteen feet in diameter, and fitted the ends of the
stone into these wheels. To connect the two wheels he framed into them,
round their circumference, small pieces of two inches square, not more
than one foot apart, each extending from one wheel to the other, and
thus enclosing the stone. Round these bars a rope was coiled, to which
the traces of the oxen were made fast, and as it was drawn out the
stone rolled by means of the wheels; but the machine, by its constant
swerving from a direct, straightforward path, stood in need of constant
rectification, so that Pæonius was at last without money for the
completion of his contract.” The uninitiated who have speculated as
to how the ancients succeeded in moving and transporting considerable
distances such huge blocks of stone, without the assistance of our
modern machinery and contrivances, are given in this quotation from
Vitruvius some hint as to the ingenuity and inventive ability of the
early architects and builders.

The temple, however, was slow in building, and Ctesiphon and Metagenes,
after writing a book on their great architectural work, passed away in
due course of time. Their places were filled by other architects, of
whom there is no record, but Demetrius, a priest of Diana, together
with Daphnis and Peonius, Ephesian architects, finally completed
the work some two hundred and twenty years after it was begun by
Ctesiphon and his son. In the course of that long interval, Scopas, an
architectural sculptor of Paros, of whom there will be more to relate
as we go on, contributed one column, which was regarded as so beautiful
that it was accepted as a model for those that followed.

Together with its architectural glories, the interior was made a
depository for many of the finest works of the great artists of
antiquity, and Scopas is said to have introduced Caryatides here. This
is doubted, but he certainly furnished a very grand statue of Hecate;
and Praxiteles, with his almost equally gifted son, adorned the shrine.

Tradition relates that upon the very night that the great Alexander was
born, the Ephesian temple was destroyed by fire, through the rapacious
greed for notoriety of one Herostratus. This antique fire-bug, when
put to the torture for his crime, confessed that his only object was
to gain immortality for his name, an ambition which he succeeded in
accomplishing through the stupidity of the states-general of Asiatic
Greece. They decreed that the name of Herostratus should never be
mentioned, and of course it always was, as all the contemporary
historians felt impelled to record the fact that a man by the name of
Herostratus was not to be mentioned, and to give the reasons therefor,
and much more about Herostratus which, had there been no decree, might
have been left unsaid. The result was and has been that a crank of
antiquity has lived by name for twenty-five hundred years, and is quite
likely to live for as many more.

When Alexander the Great reached maturity, doubtless feeling the
depression consequent upon having his advent into the world which
he was destined to dominate, associated with the destruction of so
magnificent a temple to the Asiatic Diana, offered, it is said, to pay
the cost of its restoration, provided—there is frequently a proviso
coupled with these liberal offers—provided his name should be inscribed
on the new edifice. While the Ephesians were made glad by the offer,
they did not readily fall in with the proviso. The cleverness of
their diplomatic reply, however, appealed to the susceptible side of
Alexander’s human nature, and effected a compromise. They told the
Macedonian that “it was not right for a god to make offerings to gods.”

The architect for the new temple was the great favorite of Alexander
and his fellow-countryman, Dinocrates, who it is said rebuilt the
edifice on even a more extravagant scale than was the first. Much of
the marble and sculpturing of the old temple entered into the new,
and the painters, statuaries and sculptors of the time again lavished
upon it their best art. The walls were embellished from time to time
by Parrhasius and Apelles; and Timarete, the first female artist of
note of whom there is any record, contributed a picture of the honored
Artemis. It is related that the folding doors or gates of this new
temple were made of cypress that had been allowed to season for four
generations, and that when the pieces of cypress wood were glued
together the glue was allowed to remain for four years to harden.
Mutianus, a Roman architect, states that when he found them, which was
four hundred years afterward, they were as fresh and beautiful as when
new.

Some remains of the splendor of this pagan temple are still doing
architectural duty. The great dome of the beautiful Byzantine church
of Santa Sophia in Constantinople, now a Turkish mosque, is supported
by columns of green jasper, brought from the Ephesian temple by the
Roman Emperor Justinian, and two of the pillars in the cathedral at
Pisa are also from the same source.

There is some confusion as to the works of art and decorations
associated respectively with the two temples just described which
it would be vain to attempt to clear up, believing that it matters
but little, inasmuch as it is not likely that Herostratus could have
destroyed completely the first temple, and that the services of
Dinocrates were engaged more in the line of making good the damage
done than in erecting an entirely new edifice. The upper colonnades of
Corinthian columns, however, which Mr. Wood shows as appearing in the
interior of the temple, are clearly the work of Dinocrates.

Demetrius, the priest of Diana, and his associates, Peonius and
Daphnis, the three architects who completed the first Artemesian
temple, having flourished over two hundred years after the foundation
of that structure was laid, are not, of course, to be classed among the
earlier of the Grecian architects, and, properly, should not be treated
under this heading; but as they are all grouped together in the
erection of another great Asiatic-Greek temple, and are not further met
with, it may be just as well to add what there is in respect to them at
this time.

The temple referred to was that dedicated to Apollo in the Ionian city
of Miletus, not far distant from the scene of the joint labors of
these architects at Ephesus. Its order was also Ionic, and although
not as large as that to Artemis, it could have been very little, if
any, inferior to it in columnar effect and general impressive beauty,
if not grandeur. It was three hundred and two feet in length by one
hundred and sixty-four feet in width, and, like the temple at Ephesus,
was surrounded by double rows of columns, each column, however, being
sixty-three feet in height. Indeed, Strabo, the celebrated Roman
traveller and geographer, who visited the ruins of the temple during
the first century before the Christian era, testifies that “it is the
greatest of all temples,” and adds that it remained without a roof
“in consequence of its bigness”; but this allusion to its roofless
condition is probably due to the fact that the building was never
wholly completed. Pausanias also gives it high praise, and speaks of
it as one of the wonders of Ionia, and Vitruvius numbers it “as one of
the four temples which had raised their architects to the summit of
renown”[2]—a renown, it would seem, that has been very much begrudged
them, as the literature of their time furnishes practically no data in
regard to them personally, and what estimate can be formed of them is
wholly based upon the importance of their works.

Peonius, we are told, was an Ephesian, but as to even the nativity
of the other two architects we are in the dark, although Daphnis is
supposed to have been a Miletian. There is also some little uncertainty
as to the exact date when they exercised their profession, but it is
probably safe to say that it was sometime within the first half of the
fourth century before Christ.

Two columns of the great temple to Apollo have stood proudly against
the attacks of time, and although scarred by their long battles, are
yet evidencing the glories of a structure of which they were once but
an insignificant part.

In the year 555 B.C. there lived four architects, to whose skill was
entrusted the building of a temple that should be in all respects
worthy to stand for the respect due the dignity, power and extreme
longevity of the great Olympian Zeus—the king-god of the Greeks.

The foundation for this shrine was laid in the time of Pisistratus,
a tyrant of Athens, who contributed several architectural works to
that city, but whose several banishments greatly interrupted their
building. This was particularly the case with the great temple to Zeus.
However, it was sufficiently advanced for Pisistratus to dedicate
it before he fell from power. It has been stated that it was due to
the genuine dislike which the Athenians felt for Pisistratus and his
sons, who succeeded him, that four hundred years were allowed to flow
by before the temple was finished. This is hardly just to a ruler of
great loyalty to his native city, and of unquestioned integrity in the
discharge of his public duties. It is more probable that the delay
was due to the animosity of the rival Athenian family of Alcmæonidæ,
who, piqued by jealousy, fanned a flame of opposition to the works of
Pisistratus that continued for several centuries.

Antistates, Antimachides, Calleschros and Porinus were the four
architects engaged by Pisistratus, who, like their professional
brothers employed on the temples of Diana, Apollo and Ceres, were,
according to Vitruvius, entitled to immortality for the grandeur of
their works, but about whom there is no other information to be given.

This temple to Jupiter was not built upon the Acropolis at Athens, like
that to the patron goddess of the city, Minerva, but upon a raised
peribolos within the city below, and on the site of an earlier temple
to the same god, erected in the time of Deucalion, but which had
perished from the ravages of ages.

It was like most of the early Doric temples, of peripteral
construction, or surrounded by columns on all four sides. Aristotle,
who saw it before it was finished, was so much impressed by its size
that he compared it to the Pyramids; and one of his scholars remarked
that “though unfinished, it called forth astonishment, and when
finished would be unexcelled.”

Perseus, king of Macedonia, and Antiochus Epiphanes of Syria (176-164
B.C.) finally finished the cell and placed the Corinthian columns of
the portico, employing for the purpose a Roman architect of great skill
by the name of Cossutius. It was then, probably, that Livy made the
remark “that among so many temples this is the only one worthy of a
god.”

Sylla, however, when he laid siege to Athens, some forty years later,
robbed the temple most unmercifully, carrying away with him many
of the columns to Rome. But his work of destruction was more than
compensated for by his successor, Hadrian, two hundred years still
later, under the immediate direction of the celebrated Roman architect,
Luigi Cannia. Hadrian, in his love of great architectural effects, was
inspired to beautify the peribolos with a peristyle one hundred rods
in length, and his architect contributed a new section to the temple
itself, and added three grand vestibules.

The sacred enclosure, after Hadrian had finished it, which had a
circumference of about twenty-three hundred feet, was ornamented by
statues, contributed in great numbers by different cities. The length
of the temple at this time, according to Stuart, was, upon the upper
step, three hundred and fifty-four feet, and its breadth one hundred
and seventy-one feet. The columns, which surrounded the cell, now all
Corinthian, numbered one hundred and twenty-four, all of Pentelican
marble, of which there are sixteen still standing. In the pronaos, or
inner portico, Hadrian caused to be placed four statues of himself, two
in Thracian and two in Egyptian marble, which were, perhaps, three more
than a moderately modest man might have felt necessary.

Another gorgeous temple to the great Jupiter was begun about five
years later than that at Athens by the architect Libon, an Eleian, in
Olympia, which Lysias speaks of as “the fairest spot in Greece.” In
Olympia the spiritual and physical natures of the Grecian people may
be said to have combined in the perfection of development. Here the
glories of the body, the capabilities of the finest muscular strength
and athletic action, were exhibited in gymnasium and stadion, and here
the religious spirit of the people arose to the fullest intensity, and
as though doubly inspired by the action and strength of the perfect
body, found expression in temple and sanctuary.

So great was the reward, so enthusiastic the reception accorded the
champions in the athletic games of Olympia, that they call forth a
protest from the sensitive Vitruvius, who seems to feel that the honors
conferred upon them should have been reserved for the literary lights
of the time. “The ancestors of the Greeks,” he complains, “held the
celebrated wrestlers who were victors in the Olympic, Pythian, Isthmian
and Nemean games in such esteem that, decorated with the palm and
crown, they were not only publicly thanked, but were also, in their
triumphant return to their respective homes, borne to their cities and
countries in four-horse chariots, and were allowed pensions for life
from the public revenue. When I consider these circumstances, I cannot
help thinking it strange that similar honors, or even greater, are
not decreed to those authors who are of lasting service to mankind.
Such certainly ought to be the case; for the wrestler, by training,
merely hardens his own body for the conflict; a writer, however, not
only cultivates his own mind, but affords every one else the same
opportunity, by laying down precepts for acquiring knowledge and
exciting the talents of his reader.”

So attractive was this spot on the banks of the Alpheus in Ellis, in
natural charm, as well as in the purposes for which it was visited,
that it is here, as nowhere else in Greece, with the possible exception
of the Acropolis at Athens, the Grecian architects lavished their
best skill and best illustrated their appreciation of the fact,
that the effect of fine buildings is greatly augmented by grouping
them gracefully together in one place, producing, as it were, an
architectural picture. “Many objects,” says Pausanias, “may a man see
in Greece, and many things may he hear that are worthy of admiration,
but above them all the doings at Eleusis and the sights at Olympia have
somewhat in them of a soul divine.”

The worship of Zeus was an old worship in Olympia, so that when Libon
was entrusted with authority to erect a new temple to that deity, out
of the spoils taken in subjugating the Pisans and other neighboring
cities which had revolted from the Eleans, he gave free reign to his
art, and produced a Doric temple which rivalled that in Athens, though
not as large.

Pausanias informs us that the Olympian temple was two hundred and
thirty feet long, ninety-five feet wide and sixty-eight feet high;
that it was surrounded by marble columns and covered with marble cut
in the form of tiles. The front and rear pediments were adorned with
sculpture, as well as the metopes of the frieze. The interior was of
two orders of columns supporting lofty galleries, through which there
was a passage to the throne of Jove “glittering with gold and gems.”

It was this temple of Libon’s that became, soon after its completion,
the casket which held the _chef d’œuvre_ of Phidias, the colossal
statue of Jupiter carved in ivory and gold, of which Quintilian
observes that it added a new religious feeling to Greece. The story is
well known how Phidias, being asked by his nephew Panænus, a painter,
who assisted him in the decoration of the temple, how he could have
conceived that air of divinity which he had expressed in the face
of this noble statue, replied that he had copied it from Homer’s
description of the god. Jupiter was presented naked to his waist,
but draped from his girdle down. The significance of this was that
the great Jove, knowing himself to be of heavenly origin, thought it
best to conceal himself in part only from man. He was also given a
beard for the reason that the Greeks, clinging to the Oriental notion,
believed that beards carried with them an air of majesty; an idea, by
the way, which was not shared in by the Romans, who spoke with derision
of their bearded forefathers, and permitted the wearing of beards
only to those who were in disgrace, and to poor philosophers, who
probably, like our poor modern poets, found a visit to the barber’s an
unnecessary and expensive luxury.

Rome during these early times, and before she had awakened to the
cultivation of the arts at home, was prone to borrow from Greece the
talent of which she was in need. It was about this time that we find
the first record of such a call made by Rome upon her eastern neighbor
for architects. The demand was answered by the two architectural
sculptors Damophilus and Gorgasus, who were imported by the Dictator
Posthumius to erect two temples in Rome, one to Castor and Pollux
or, as some authorities assert, to Liber and Libera (Bacchus and
Proserpine), which stood near the Forum and Temple of Vesta, and the
other to Ceres, on the slope of the Aventine hill, near the Circus.
These temples were vowed by Posthumius, in his battle with the Latins,
496 B.C., and were dedicated by Viscellinus some years later.

Before closing this chapter, in which the attempt is made to gather
together some of the earlier architects of Greece, it may be as well to
include within it a number of such artists who though not rising to the
highest fame, or who were not connected with the most elegant buildings
of their time, nevertheless had the good fortune to have their names
preserved in history.

Pliny tells a rather amusing and interesting account of such an
architect by the name of Bupalus, who probably flourished about the
year 524 B.C. He is said to have come from a very old family of
artists who exercised the art of the statuary from the beginning of
the Olympiads; but as Pliny simply speaks of him as an architect and
artist, but does not mention any building attributed to his skill, he
becomes a subject for notice only in connection with the Iambic poet
Hipponax, whom he used his art to torment. Pliny relates that Bupalus
and his brother Athenis amused themselves by making caricatures of the
satirical poet. Hipponax was undersized, thin and ugly, and probably,
like the modern poet Pope, suffered his physical defects to give him
a cynical view of life. The caricatures of the playful Bupalus and
Athenis naturally affected unpleasantly his _amour propre_, and he
employed the weapon at his command, his ironical pen, to strike back at
his tormentors, with the result that he gave them a good pen lashing
in a satirical poem, in which he also chastised his Ionian brethren for
what he considered their effeminate luxury. In the same poem, also,
he did not spare his own parents, and it is said that he even had the
temerity to ridicule the gods.

There is, of course, always some one to start the story that a woman is
at the source of all the infirmities that any particularly conspicuous
man suffers from, and there are those who claim that Bupalus did not
originate the trouble, but that it started through the fact that the
architect had a very beautiful daughter of whom Hipponax was greatly
enamored. Like the earlier Iambic poet Archilochus, who got into a
similar scrape, the girl’s father refused to permit his daughter to
marry a poor little withered poet, with the result that the poet’s life
was ever after embittered. How very bitter Hipponax became, especially
against the ladies, is illustrated by a remark which is attributed
to him: “There are,” he said, “only two happy days in the life of a
married man—that in which he receives his wife, and that in which he
carries out her corpse.”

After his death Leonidas of Tarentum, in an elegant epigram, warned
travellers not to pass too near his tomb, lest they rouse the sleeping
wasp. The grave of Hipponax, by the way, instead of being covered with
ivy and roses, like that of a mild poet, was planted with thorns and
thistles.

Pausanias mentions several of these more obscure architects. Agnaptus
was one, who built a porch in the Altis, or wall at Olympia, called
afterward by the Eleans the “porch of Agnaptus,” and Antiphilus,
Pothæus and Megacles were three other waifs on our sea of oblivion.
They were responsible for the Treasury of the Carthaginians also
at Olympia. Pyrrhus, with his two sons, Lacrates and Hermon, built
the Olympian Treasury of the Epidamnians. There were ten of these
Treasuries, by the way, raised by different states, which were not only
architecturally very beautiful, but which contained statues and other
offerings of great value.

Strabo mentions an architect and sculptor by the name of Hermocreon,
who designed a gigantic and beautiful altar at Parium on the Propontis
in Asia Minor; and Eurycles, a Spartan architect, who built the baths
at Corinth, and “adorned them with beautiful marbles,” must not be
overlooked, although he may have been of a much later date.


FOOTNOTES:

[2] The other three temples which Vitruvius praised thus highly were
those to Diana at Ephesus, Jupiter Olympus at Athens, and Ceres at
Eleusis.




CHAPTER V.

THE ARCHITECTURAL EPOCH OF PERICLES.


The age of Pericles was so distinctively an era in the advancement of
the arts, especially architecture, not alone in the city where Athene
shed her divine intelligence and tutelary influence with generous
favor, but throughout all the Hellenic states, and has left so many
models and criterions for the architects of all time to follow, that a
few words in reference to Pericles himself and the sculptor Phidias,
into whose hands he entrusted the direction of his public buildings
and the adornment of Athens, may be admissible, before we consider
the architectural geniuses who sprung forward to meet the great
requirements of the time.

Pericles was a descendant of that noble and refined, if sometimes
unfortunate, house of Alcmæonidæ, which did so much for the Delphic
temple of Apollo, and a son of Xanthippus, the victor of Mycale,
and Agariste, niece of Cleisthenes, founder of the later Athenian
constitution. The date of his birth is not known, but that he early
evinced a leaning toward the fine arts and philosophy is recorded.
Under Pythocleides he studied music, under Damon political science,
under Zeno philosophy; but it remained for the erudite Anaxagoras to
give the final burnish to his character and thought. He was therefore,
both by birth and disposition, as well as cultivation, possessed of
a mind singularly comprehensive in its grasp of the advantages which
the arts of peace could contribute to the progress of his people, and
naturally turned his attention to their exploitation and development,
when he became dominant in the year 444 B.C. His rule of peace lasted
but thirteen years, or until the breaking out of the Peloponnesian war,
but was crowded with numerous artistic and architectural triumphs.

That he may have gone a step too far in the encouragement of pleasure
and the peaceful virtues among a people of warlike antecedents and a
future before them of foreordained defence and conquest, if not final
defeat, may be a subject for speculation; but that he gave an impetus
to literature and art, and by the fervent warmth of his patronage
fostered the growth of genius in a way that had not been equalled
before his time, and which has never been excelled since, is the
principal reason, doubtless, for his immortality.

His head was abnormally long, a defect which the artists of his
time invariably corrected with a helmet when painting or sculpturing
his portrait, and the contemporaneous comic poets and satirists as
continually ridiculed in verse and jest. Speaking of his eloquence
and powers of persuasion, Thucydides relates a pleasant story in
respect to his dexterity in this regard. When Archidamus, king of the
Lacedæmonians, asked Thucydides whether he or Pericles was the better
wrestler, he replied: “When I have thrown him and given him a fair
fall, he, by persisting that he had no fall, gets the better of me, and
makes the bystanders, in spite of their own eyes, believe him.” But in
other respects his physique was well proportioned and his bearing noble
and commanding. His manner was dignified and reserved, his eloquence
strong, fearless and convincing, and his general appearance such as to
inspire the people to compliment him with the name “Olympian Zeus,”
a character in which his portrait was also painted by his favorite,
Phidias.

An English writer well says that the age of Pericles was “the milky
way of great men,” for it was certainly clouded to whiteness with
intellectual stars. The names associated with this era are not only
among the most celebrated in all Grecian history, but among the most
renowned that have sprung forward in the history of all the world.
Poets, philosophers, dramatists, musicians, sculptors, painters,
architects, not only arose in great numbers under his fostering
encouragement, but to the highest eminence in their respective
avocations. In fact, it seems as though the human plant that had
long been growing, strengthening and broadening upon Hellenic soil
had suddenly sprung into the fullest flower and enveloped itself in
intellectual beauty.

The Athens which we so frequently see pictured in all her restored
architectural grace and grandeur, the Athens which from her Acropolis
of chiselled white so proudly surveys the Ægean sea and surrounding
plains, is the Athens of Pericles, noblest of all cities in the
pursuits of virtue, of beauty and contentment, and in the pure
realization of that happiness which the practice of the arts alone can
afford.

The budding of Athenian architectural magnificence may be said to have
begun under Themistocles and Cimon, the immediate predecessors of
Pericles, but not to have ripened and flowered in its perfection until
his advent into power. Then it was that the task of building a city in
every way worthy of the people who had proved their prowess before the
Persian hosts in war, and who in peace could delight in the musical
poems of Homer, was pushed to a speedy realization with enthusiasm.

Nothing in all the biography of Pericles has contributed so greatly
to the perpetuity of his fame as this attention which he gave to the
development of the architectural magnificence of Athens. “That which
gave most pleasure and ornament to the city of Athens,” says Plutarch,
“and the greatest admiration and even astonishment to all strangers,
and that which now is Greece’s only evidence that the power she
boasts of and her ancient wealth are no romance or idle story, was
his construction of the public and sacred buildings. The materials
were stone, brass, ivory, gold, ebony and cypress-wood; the artisans
that wrought and fashioned them were smiths and carpenters, moulders,
founders and braziers, stone-cutters, dyers, goldsmiths, ivory-workers,
painters, embroiderers, turners; those again that conveyed them to
the town for use, merchants and mariners and ship-masters by sea;
and by land, cartwrights, cattle breeders, wagoners, rope-makers,
flax-workers, shoemakers and leather-dressers, road-makers, miners.
And every trade in the same nature, as a captain in an army has his
particular company of soldiers under him, had its own hired company of
journeymen and laborers belonging to it banded together as in array,
to be, as it were, the instrument and body for the performance of the
service. Thus, to say all in a word, the occasions and services of
these public works distributed plenty through every age and condition.”

“Architecture,” says Robert Adam, “in a particular manner depends upon
the patronage of the great, as they alone are able to execute what
the architect plans.” This being so, the architects of his time had
in Pericles a patron in every way worthy their best efforts. Indeed,
so ambitious was he to grace the city of his nativity with all the
beauties of architecture that his enemies found here a pretext for
censure, and complained that he spent too much of the public treasure
for such a purpose. He met the criticism, however, with the argument
that those who pursued the arts of war should not be the only ones
to receive support at the expense of the state, but that those who
possessed the skill and industry of true artists and artisans were
quite as much entitled to public encouragement and support as the
soldier.

This answer for a time appeased the clamor of the opposition, which
had been set up against what they would lead the people to believe was
extravagance and wastefulness on the part of Pericles. But it soon
broke out again. When finally it became no longer bearable, Pericles
addressed his accusers and said: “If you think that I have expended
too much let the money be charged to my account, not yours, _only let
the new edifices be inscribed with my name and not that of the people
of Athens_.” It is to the credit of the Athenians that their pride was
touched by the words of their ruler and their cupidity restrained.
They at once replied that Pericles might spend as much of their money
as he pleased, and they even went further, and insisted that he should
not spare the public treasury in the least. Like all great men,
Pericles was assailed in a variety of ways. When his enemies did not
accomplish their purpose in bringing him to public disgrace by one
method of assault, they tried another. We have seen how they failed in
one instance; another was similar in accusing him, in complicity with
Phidias, of appropriating to his own use the public treasure, donated
to pay for the golden plates on the chryselephantine statues of the
latter’s creation. But this charge also not proving successful, they
attacked his religious character, strange as it may appear, when it is
remembered how deeply he was interested in erecting temples of pagan
worship. But he survived the slanders of his time and continued his
aims and purposes in life, content, doubtless, that posterity should
judge him aright, as did the majority of the people of his own time.
His last words are perhaps the best epitome of his life’s work: “No
Athenian ever put on black through me.”

Teleclides has put into verse the great surrender which the Athenian
people appeared finally to make to Pericles of their rights in peace
and war:

    “The tribute of the cities, and, with them, the cities too,
     To do with them as he pleases, and undo;
     To build up, if he likes, stone walls around a town;
     And, again, if so he likes, to pull them down;
     Their treaties and alliances, power, empire, peace and war,
     Their wealth and their success forevermore.”

As already stated, in no branch of the arts did the age of Pericles
make a deeper and more lasting impression than in that of architecture.
Although the Doric order was employed many hundred years before his
time, and the Ionic scarcely less many, yet the finest types of each
and the examples of these orders which stand for their most perfect and
artistic development are to be found in the Acropolis at Athens in the
time of Pericles, the Parthenon serving as the criterion of one and the
Erechtheum as the model of the other. That these orders should have
been brought to such perfection and endowed with their crowning dignity
and grace, must alone prove without further argument, if need be, that
the architectural talent and artistic sense of the age was incomparable.

The part which the great sculptor Phidias played in the art drama of
his time has been already alluded to, but not sufficiently, perhaps, to
exclude a further reference to him.

The comparison has often been made between Phidias and the talented
revivalist of the fifteenth century, Michael Angelo, and a casual
consideration of the two eminent artists would indicate that it was a
proper one. They were both sculptors, both painters, both engravers
(Phidias of gems), but they were not both architects, as is erroneously
assumed. As to the respective degrees of talent which each manifested
toward the branches of art which he professed, they also differed
widely. In sculpture the school of Michael Angelo will not outlive that
of Phidias, but in painting, especially in its application to mural
decoration, the Greek must bow to the Italian. In architecture also
Phidias possessed none of the technical knowledge and skill which in
Michael Angelo enabled him to suspend the great dome of St. Peter’s
“as if in the air,” and which was so important a factor in his long
artistic career, manifested in other ways as well, and gaining for him
perpetual applause. However, the two artists may be well compared,
inasmuch that they both created epochs of their own; and both excelled
in exhibiting a noble understanding as to the high and exalted
possibilities of art that has never been equalled.

Phidias’s comprehensive grasp of broad artistic effects had as much
to do, probably, with gaining for him the favor of Pericles as his
technical skill. Quintilian calls him the “Sculptor of the gods.”
He realized the greatness of large things and could calculate their
power in influencing the imagination and understanding. He was once
invited, together with his contemporary artist, Alcamenes, to design a
statue of Minerva, destined to be placed upon a high column. When both
statues were finished and exhibited, that made by Alcamenes was at once
preferred on account of its elegance of finish, while that by Phidias
was rejected as being rough and crude. Phidias, however, insisted
that each should be shown from the high pinnacle upon which it might
ultimately be placed. When this was done all the elegant graces of
the statue of Alcamenes were lost to sight, as well also the apparent
roughness of that by Phidias, which now took on the perfect proportions
he had foreseen. This story will serve to illustrate the breadth of his
artistic discernment.

Of all the artists of his time, Phidias was by far the best gifted to
have placed in his hands, by Pericles, the supervision of the public
buildings of Athens, and to have entrusted to his discretion and
judgment the planning, posing and arranging of the grand architectural
_mise en scène_, which his patron had determined should be set there.
If Phidias did not draw the actual plans of a building or other
structure, his judgment could indicate its order, its location and such
other characteristics it should possess to harmonize with the features
with which it was to be associated. He could group the majestic masonry
of his time in grand display, could beautify it with his own chisel,
and could form and mould the complete architectural picture. If he was
not the architect of the Parthenon, he at least enhanced its effect
with the magnificence of his sculpturings and designs in the metopes
of the frieze and the tympanums of the pediments, some of which are
still to be seen among the “Elgin marbles” in the British Museum,
of which Canova remarked they would alone compensate for a visit to
England. It is not improbable, also, that he may have suggested the
Caryatides of the Erechtheum, and proved to the Egyptians, from whom
the architectural idea was borrowed, how far more beautifully and
gracefully such figures could be carved in Athens than on the banks of
the Nile.

There can be no doubt as to the value of statuary, which was the
special province of Phidias, in enhancing the _ensemble_ of Grecian
architectural grouping, and particularly valuable was the colossal
figure of Minerva Promachus in contributing to the grandiose effect of
the Athenian Acropolis. This noble work of Phidias was seventy feet
high and made entirely of bronze, said to have been taken from the
Medes, who disembarked at Marathon. The colossal goddess stood exposed,
and in a position where, in looking far away over the Ægean sea, she
might be an inspiration to the returning Athenian mariner, and where,
in glancing from her lofty eminence, “she seemed, by her attitude and
her accoutrements, to promise protection to the city beneath her, and
to bid defiance to her enemies.”

Another architectural statue, if it may be called such, was that of
the same goddess, in gold and ivory, which dominated the interior of
the Parthenon. This work of Phidias, second only in beauty and size
to the chryselephantine statue of Jupiter at Olympia, is said to
have cost $465,000. The figure of Minerva was forty feet in height,
and was presented standing in a tunic which reached to her feet. A
casque covered her head, her right hand held a spear, and her left a
figure of Victory. The exquisite workmanship of the carving on the
buckler resting at the feet of the deity came near involving Pericles
and Phidias in another web of trouble, for it was asserted that the
sculptor had introduced his own portrait and that of his patron among
the combatants of a battle between the Athenians and Amazons, there
portrayed. The captious objection was set up that such a liberty was
insulting to Athene. Phidias, as related by some writers, was cast
into prison for this act of impiety, and died there. Others claim,
however, that this was not so, but that Phidias, before sentence could
be passed, fled to Elis, where he at once entered upon the work of
modelling the great statue of the Olympian Jupiter.

In respect to both statues, he was implicated with Pericles, as accused
by his enemies, with pilfering the gold donated for their construction.
These various accusations have led to considerable confusion in respect
to much of his personal history and final end, and although it was
proved by removing the gold plates and weighing them, that he was not
guilty of the alleged crime, it is very probable that his death was as
much due to disappointed hopes and mortification consequent upon the
false charge as it was to any public executioner of the time.




CHAPTER VI.

THE ARCHITECTS OF THE AGE OF PERICLES.


It is not the intention, in recalling some of the more conspicuous
architects who flourished in the time of Pericles, to confine them to
those only who were directly in his employ, but to group together all
who became prominent factors in the architectural development of that
age, both for some years before and after Pericles’s reign of power.

To have carried forward the many important works which the great leader
instituted, and which were advanced with a precision and rapidity
remarkable for that or any other time, considering their size and
importance, the skill and services of many architects were brought
naturally into requisition. As a result we have the record of an
unusually large number of such artists, and in respect to a few some
little specific data relating to their lives. The architects, however,
of many of the most important works are unknown.

If we approach Athens, like the Attic mariner of old, through the
Piræus, one of its sea gates, we are attracted at once to the beautiful
architectural display which this seaport town, some five or six
miles distant from the Grecian metropolis, presents. The entrance to
the harbor was ornamented with two lions, and the harbor-basin was
fringed with magnificent colonnades and porticos, which disguised the
warehouses and bazaars. Within the town were numerous temples, two
theatres and other buildings of artistic effect and merit.

The road to Athens lay between massive fortified walls having a width
of fifteen feet at the top, and built to a height of sixty feet. They
were known as the “Long Walls,” and they enclosed a space about the
Piræus, said by Thucydides to have been not less than one hundred and
twenty-four stadia in circumference, or about fifteen miles.

It is only just to state that the walls which led from Athens to
Piræus, as well as those which connected it with the other sea gates
of Munychia and Phalerus, were originally planned and partly executed
under Themistocles and Cimon. Themistocles intended to construct these
walls to a height of one hundred and twenty feet; but Pericles deemed
this entirely unnecessary, and cut the height in two, as we have seen.
He also added a third wall between that running to the north of the
Piræan fortifications and that reaching to the Phalerum. Socrates
speaks of having heard Pericles mention this wall to the people.

The architects for much of this massive mural work were Hippodamus
and Callicrates, and because Pericles did not hurry them to the same
extent that he hurried others engaged in perhaps less important, if
more decorative, undertakings, Cratinus, the satirist, ridiculed the
slowness of the work, while aiming a sly shaft of irony at Pericles’s
oratorical gifts:

    “Stones upon stones the orator has pil’d
     With swelling words, but words will build no walls.”

Hippodamus was one of the geniuses of his day, and has been called
the “Wren of his age.” Perhaps it would be more fitting to speak of
Sir Christopher Wren as the Hippodamus of _his_ time, inasmuch as the
architectural achievements of the Greek were on a much more magnificent
scale than those of the Englishman. Among some of the conspicuous works
credited to him was the grand Athenian Agora, or Forum, which was made
up of a rich assemblage of colonnades, temples, altars and statues, all
taking his name as the Hippodamæa. But whether he is to be credited
with being more especially a civil engineer than an architect may be
inferred from his work at the Piræus and in laying out entire cities.

He was called the “Excentric Architect” doubtless because he mingled
with the practice of his profession a desire to be considered as
thoroughly versed in all the physical sciences, a personal affectation
which caused him to be ranked among the sophists. It is claimed that it
was against Hippodamus that Aristophanes aimed much of his wit.

Hippodamus was the son of Euryphon of Miletus, one of the most famous
of the Greek physicians and among the first to have knowledge of the
difference between the veins and arteries, and the uses of each. As
to his early education and advantages we are not informed, he being
referred to by early writers only in a professional way.

Besides his employment upon the “Long Walls,” the Agora and other
edifices, Pericles engaged his talents, as we have intimated, in laying
out the port of Piræus, which he did, with broad streets and avenues
intersecting each other at right angles across the city. This plan of
street construction he also introduced in other cities of Greece and
her colonies with which he had to do, especially at Thurü on the site
of the ancient Sybaris, which he visited with the Athenian colonists,
and later at Rhodes. This last-mentioned city, which in the age of
Pericles was one of the most beautiful, regular and prosperous of the
times, was almost wholly the work of Hippodamus.

Callicrates, who assisted Hippodamus with the “Long Walls,” was also an
associate of Ictinus, perhaps the greatest architect of his time, in
the building of the Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis. The architect
Callicrates should not be mistaken for the Lacedæmonian sculptor of
the same name who achieved great celebrity for his skill in carving
the most minute objects, and of whom it is related that he made ants
and other insects in ivory which were so very small that their limbs
could not be distinguished by the naked eye. This seems all the more
remarkable when it is remembered that the ancients had no magnifying
glasses.

A walk of five or six miles under the shadows of the tall walls of
Hippodamus and Callicrates to view the greater architectural glories
of the city of Athens in the time of Pericles will doubtless repay us.
While this queen city of the ancient world is enrobed in many triumphs
of the builder’s art, we will probably pass them all by for the time
being to examine more carefully the gems that stand forth from the
Acropolis, glittering under the blue Grecian sky like white jewels in
the proud city’s coronet.

This magnificent citadel, protected by Pelasgian walls and dedicated
to the pagan deity Minerva, could be entered but upon one side, the
western, where the massive gate or vestibule of the Propylæa occupied
the centre. Fragments of this great gate still give evidence to the
modern traveller of its former stately splendor.

“Here,” says Bishop Wordsworth, “above all places at Athens, the mind
of the traveller enjoys an exquisite pleasure. It seems as if this
portal had been spared in order that our imagination might send through
it, as through a triumphal arch, all the glories of Athenian antiquity
in visible parade. It was this particular point in the localities of
Athens which was most admired by the Athenians themselves; nor is
this surprising; let us conceive such a restitution of this fabric
as its surviving fragments will suggest—let us imagine it restored
to its pristine beauty—let it rise once more in the full dignity of
its youthful nature—let all its architectural decorations be fresh
and perfect—let their mouldings be again brilliant with their glowing
tints of red and blue—let the coffers of its soffits be again spangled
with stars, and the marble antæ be fringed over as they were once with
delicate embroidery of ivy-leaf ... and then let the bronze valves of
these five gates of the Propylæa be suddenly flung open and all the
splendors of the interior of the Acropolis burst upon the view.”

If this imaginative restoration of the sublimities of the Propylæa
is not sufficient to excite some interest in the building and the
slave-born architect who was its creator, let the glowing words of
Symonds be added, which refer not only to the grand vestibule itself,
but to the Panathenaic processions which were wont to pass its gates.

“Musing thus upon the staircase of the Propylæa we may say with truth
that all our modern art is but as child’s play to that of the Greeks.
Very soul-subduing is the gloom of a cathedral like the Milanese Duomo
when the incense rises in blue clouds athwart the bands of sunlight
falling from the dome, and the crying of choirs upborne on the wings
of organ music fills the whole vast space with a mystery of melody.
Yet such ceremonial pomps as this are but as dreams and shapes of
visions when compared with the clearly defined splendors of a Greek
procession through marble peristyles in open air beneath the sun and
sky. That spectacle combined the harmonies of perfect human forms in
movement with the divine shapes of statues, the radiance of carefully
selected vestments with hues inwrought upon pure marble. The rhythms
and melodies of the Doric mood were sympathetic to the proportions of
the Doric colonnades. The grove of pillars through which the pageant
passed grew from the living rocks into shapes of beauty, fulfilling by
the inbreathed spirit of man nature’s blind yearning after absolute
completion. The sun itself, not thwarted by artificial gloom or tricked
with alien colors of stained glass, was made to minister in all his
strength to a pomp the pride of which was a display of form in manifold
magnificence. The ritual of the Greeks was the ritual of a race at one
with nature, glorying in its affiliation to the mighty mother of all
life, and striving to add by human art the coping stone and final touch
to her achievement.”

The Propylæa stretched in all about one hundred and seventy feet across
the western side of the citadel, and was entirely built of Pentelic
marble. In the centre was a portico sixty feet broad of six fluted
Doric columns, each column thirty feet in height, and all supporting
a noble pediment. From this portico projected on either side a wing,
entered through three Ionic columns. Six Ionic columns assisted in
supporting the roof of the vestibule. The marble beams of this roof
were from seventeen to twenty-two feet in length and correspondingly
solid. The ceiling was richly carved and ornamented. Immediately in the
rear of the Ionic columns and at the end facing the Acropolis stood
the terminal wall, with its five bronze gates, the centre one, which
was the largest, being sufficiently broad to allow the passage of a
chariot or other such vehicle. Beyond this wall and its gates was the
posticum, adding eighteen feet to the depth of forty-three feet which
the building otherwise possessed. The temple of the “Wingless Victory,”
and the “Painted Chamber,” containing the finest works of the painter
Polygnotus, as they have been named, formed the wings, which presented
unbroken walls to the front, relieved only by the four Ionic columns
that supported the graceful entablature and pediment of the temple of
Niké Apteros on the right.

As the building was begun in the year 437 B.C., and was entirely
completed within a period of five years, and was one of the most
imposing structures of its day, Pausanias is led to reflect that, “in
felicity of execution and in boldness and originality of design, it
rivalled the Parthenon.” Lübke’s comment on the structure is: “Thus in
this building the idea of fortress-like defence, as well as festive
welcome, was equally expressed. Especially admirable, however, was
the rich ceiling of the great three-naved court, both on account of
the bold span of its beams and the magnificent decoration of the
spaces between them (the coffers), which were brilliant with gold
and colors.[3] The Ionic form of the columns in the interior also
corresponded with this festive, cheerful character; while the two rows
of columns on the outside, together with the rest of the exterior of
the building, exhibited the seriousness and dignity of the Doric style.”

Thus has much been quoted in description and eulogy of this noble piece
of architecture; would that as much might be quoted in respect to the
talents and career of its gifted designer, but of him there is only the
shadow of comment, from which it is possible to weave but the faintest
fabric of certainty concerning his life.

His name was Mnesicles, and we are told that he was a slave born in
the household of Pericles. That he should have been chosen to create
so important an architectural work speaks for the privilege which the
humblest born might hope to attain in rising to positions of trust and
prominence in the days of that great leader. Mnesicles early manifested
an aptitude for architecture, and was permitted by his illustrious
patron and owner to exercise his talent in the erection of buildings
of inferior consequence before being entrusted with more ambitious
works. The Propylæa was not the only work of magnitude upon which
he was engaged, nor was it the most beautiful, in the judgment of some
critics, although the most important, for he was the architect as well
of the graceful Doric temple of Theseus, which has always been regarded
as one of the finest architectural conceptions the ancient city of
Athens possessed.

[Illustration: THE FALL OF MNESICLES FROM THE PROPYLÆA.]

An incident in his life which awakened the affectionate interest of
Pericles and the solicitude of the goddess Athene, whom he was serving
so well, is told by Plutarch and other early biographers. It is in
effect that while inspecting the almost completed work of the Propylæa
he fell from the summit of the pediment and was most severely injured.
He was taken at once to the house of Pericles, where he received the
personal attention of the great ruler. It was while he lay at death’s
door that it is said Minerva appeared to Pericles in a dream, and told
him to administer to Mnesicles a medicine distilled from the wall-plant
pellitory. This was done, and the life of the architect was spared.
The only other fact associated with the life of Mnesicles which has
been preserved to us is one mentioned by Pliny to the effect that the
sculptor Stipax of Cyprus made a statue of the architect which became
very celebrated in its time, and which was called _Splanchnoptes_.
It was given this name because it represented a person roasting the
entrails of the victim at a sacrifice, at the same time blowing the
fire with his breath. There is nothing suggestive of the architect in
question or his profession, but it is supposed to have been a statue
of Mnesicles, from the fact that Pliny speaks of the subject as having
been a slave of Pericles, who was cured of the wounds received in a
fall from the Propylæa by an herb which Minerva had suggested should be
given as a medicine. It is unfortunate that the statue has not survived
to give us some idea of the features of at least one of the great
architects of antiquity. Some recent discoveries on the Acropolis have,
however, brought forth fragments which are supposed to have been parts
of the base.

If there is any one of the Greek architects of the time of Pericles
who can be said to have secured for himself a degree of popular
notoriety throughout subsequent ages it is the accomplished Ictinus,
the chief architect of the Parthenon and the designer of at least two
other conspicuously beautiful buildings of which we know—namely, the
temple of Apollo Epicurus, near Phigalia in Arcadia, and the temple of
Ceres and Proserpine at Eleusis. It is, no doubt, due, however, to his
connection with the Parthenon that his fame has so long endured.

As already stated, Callicrates assisted in the building of the
Parthenon, and Phidias contributed the designs for the relief carvings
in the pediments and metopes, executing much of the work with his own
hands. Although Vitruvius says that “both Ictinus and Callicrates
exerted all their powers to make this temple worthy of the goddess who
presided over the arts,” it is not likely that Callicrates’s share in
the work was equal to that of Ictinus, but was confined more to the
heavy masonry, and in offering to Ictinus such advice as he might seek
in giving to the building the greatest substantiality and permanency.

The Parthenon, which, among the several masterpieces of the Acropolis,
must be acknowledged the greatest, stood upon a rocky elevation in the
citadel, which so far elevated the structure as to bring the pavement
of the peristyle upon a level with the capitals of the columns of the
eastern portico of the Propylæa. This was the same site which had been
occupied formerly by an earlier temple to Minerva, known among the
Athenians as the Hecatompedon on account of its proportions.

The Parthenon of Ictinus is said to have cost one thousand talents, or
what would be equal to about $1,100,000 of our money. It was begun the
year 422 B.C., and completed at the expiration of sixteen years. It
conformed to the usual shape of the Greek temples, being rectangular
and peripteral. The length from east to west was two hundred and
twenty-seven feet and seven inches, the width a little over one
hundred and one feet. The Doric order was employed for the exterior,
the columns which surrounded the cell on all sides being thirty-four
feet in height, with a diameter of six feet at the base. There were
forty-six of these columns, springing directly from the stylobate or
steps, all fluted with twenty channels, and each carrying its share of
a very beautiful entablature. The gables or pediments at each end of
the temple were of flat pitch. The total height of the building from
the steps to the top of the gables was sixty-four feet. White marble
from Mount Pentelicum, “wrought,” as Mr. Kinnaird expresses it, “with
the exquisite finish of a cameo,” was the material employed for the
entire structure, with the exception of the supporting timbers of the
roof, which were wood covered with marble tiles.

The interior, to quote Mr. Kinnaird again, “enshrined the
chryselephantine colossus with all its gorgeous adjuncts, and comprised
sculptural decoration alone for one edifice exceeding in quantity that
of all recent national monuments; consisting of a range of eleven
hundred feet of sculpture and containing, on calculation, upward of
six hundred figures, a portion of which were colossal, enriched by
painting and probably golden ornaments. Here has been really verified
the prediction of Pericles that, when the edifices of rival states
would be mouldering in oblivion, the splendor of his city would be
still paramount and triumphant.” In respect to the richness of its
interior treasures, very much the same idea is expressed by Bishop
Wordsworth, who says, in the course of his description of the building:
“It would, therefore, be a very erroneous idea to regard this temple
which we are describing merely as the best school of architecture in
the world. It was also the noblest school of sculpture and the richest
gallery of painting.”

The cleverness of the architects in insuring to the Parthenon, after
its completion, the appearance of absolute harmony of proportion in
all its outward lines, is one of their best claims to that celebrity
which they have justly earned. As it goes so far toward illustrating
their great professional skill, the reader may be interested in reading
the language used by Professor Roger Smith of London in explaining the
measures adopted by Ictinus and possibly Callicrates also, to correct
the optical defects which the Parthenon might otherwise have possessed
when completed.

“The delicacy and subtlety of these [optical illusions] are extreme,
but there can be no manner of doubt that they existed. The best known
correction is the diminution in diameter or taper, and the _entasis_
or convex curve of the tapered outline of the shaft of the column.
Without the taper, which is perceptible enough in the order of this
building, and much more marked in the order of earlier buildings,
the columns would look top-heavy; but the _entasis_ is an additional
optical correction to prevent their outline from appearing hollowed,
which it would have done had there been no curve. The columns of the
Parthenon have shafts that are over thirty-four feet high, and diminish
from a diameter of 6.15 feet at the bottom to 4.81 feet at the top.
The outline between these points is convex, but so slightly so that
the curve departs at the point of greatest curvature not more than
three-quarters of an inch from the straight line joining the top and
bottom. This is, however, just sufficient to correct the tendency to
look hollow in the middle.

“A second correction is intended to overcome the apparent tendency of
a building to spread outward toward the top. This is met by inclining
the columns slightly inward. So slight, however, is the inclination,
that were the axes of two columns on opposite sides of the Parthenon
continued upward till they met, the meeting point would be 1952 yards,
or, in other words, more than one mile from the ground.

“Another optical correction is applied to the horizontal lines. In
order to overcome a tendency which exists in all long lines to seem as
though they drop in the middle, the lines of the architrave of the top
step and of other horizontal features of the building are all slightly
curved. The difference between the outline of the top step of the
Parthenon and a straight line joining its two ends is at the greatest
only just two inches.”

Still another correction which Professor Smith alludes to, in respect
to the vertical proportions of the building, he does not discuss more
than to say: “The small additions, amounting in the entire length of
the order to less than five inches, were made to the heights of the
various members of the order, with a view to secure that from one
definite point of view the effect of foreshortening should be exactly
compensated, and so the building should appear to the spectator to be
perfectly proportioned.”

The Parthenon was not, as is popularly supposed, a temple for the
worship of Minerva. The sanctuary for that particular purpose was
in the Erechtheum, a triple temple, located upon the Acropolis not
very far distant from the Parthenon, and having wings dedicated
respectively to Minerva Polias, to Erechtheus or Neptune, wherein was
a well of salt water, and to the Nymph Pandrosus, daughter of Cecrops.
The Parthenon, however, served as a national treasury and repository
for the valuable offerings to the goddess, as well as “a central point
for the Panathenaic festival,” where prizes might be distributed to
the victorious competitors. Indeed, the decorations of Phidias would
tend to corroborate this inference, as the sculptured low relief of the
frieze represented the Panathenaic procession. The rich relief carvings
in the tympanums of the front and rear pediments of the building, also
by Phidias, the designs of which may be found described in almost any
work on Grecian art, have been reproduced in some of the vignettes of
this book.

In alluding to the Erechtheum, which, like the Parthenon and the
Propylæa, still presents shapely and beautiful ruins to grace the
Acropolis, attract the tourist and lend to the lover of art the best
criterion of the ideal age of Grecian architecture, we must mourn the
fact that the architect who designed this magnificent example of the
Ionic order is not known, and it is not likely that he ever will be.
The building was not finished at the time of the death of Pericles.
Because of an inscription found in the Acropolis, and now in the
British Museum, containing the particulars of a minute professional
survey of the unfinished parts, made by an Athenian architect named
Philocles, in the year 336 B.C., this architect has been given by some
the credit of having been the author of the entire structure; but that
he could not have been is clearly proven by the known fact that much of
the temple was constructed, as we have stated, in the time of Pericles,
or about one hundred years earlier. Nothing further, by the way, is
known of Philocles than is here given.

About two thousand years had passed without that great leveller Time
or the corroding influences of the elements marring to any very
serious extent the beauty and completeness of the Parthenon, during
which period it had suffered two changes most antagonistic to its
original purpose, having been transformed at one time into a Christian
church and at another into a Turkish mosque. In respect to the first
transformation, it is well to note that the significance of its name
was not wholly lost in the change. Parthenon means Virgin, and the
Christians called the church into which they turned it the Church of
the Blessed Virgin. It was seen entire by Spon and Wheeler in 1676. But
when the Venetians, in their war with the Turks, eleven years later,
besieged the citadel, they threw a bomb upon the roof of the noble
structure, which, passing through it, ignited the powder which had
been stored in the building by the Turks. The result was an explosion
which divided and reduced the temple to its present condition, save for
further depredations which seem hardly creditable. The iconoclastic
Turks found this pride of Pericles most useful as a quarry upon which
to draw for much of the material used in their own buildings, and it
is to be regretted also that Lord Elgin should have found it necessary
to enrich a distant museum in London with many of its most beautiful
carvings, adding further desecration to “what Goth and Turk and Time
had spared.” Vitruvius informs us that Ictinus, in collaboration with
another architect, not otherwise mentioned, wrote a book upon the
Parthenon, his greatest masterpiece.

After searching the world over for her dear, lost daughter, the
beautiful Proserpine, who had been spirited away to the realm of Pluto,
Ceres finally gave up the quest and mournfully settled down at Eleusis,
a city in fertile Bœotia, about fourteen miles from Athens. Here was
erected in her honor and in memory of Proserpine an Ionic temple by the
people for whom she became sponsor. The Persians, during their invasion
of Attica, burned the temple, but Pericles caused it to be rebuilt,
and selected Ictinus as the architect. He erected a handsomer structure
in the Doric style, which, it is said, was without exposed columns.

Whether Ictinus lived long enough to complete the temple to Ceres and
Proserpine or not, or was called away for other purposes, is not known,
but it appears that other architects were associated with its design
and erection, both before as well as after his connection with it.
Corœbus is mentioned also as an architect, in the employ of Pericles,
who began the work on the mystic cell, but that his sudden death
resulted in the substitution of Ictinus. It is more probable, however,
that Ictinus had previously furnished the design of the building and
that Corœbus had been merely acting under his supervision. Following
Ictinus was another Athenian architect appointed by Pericles, and
the designer of the demos of Cholargos. He is said to have built
the pediment of the temple with the timpanum open, according to an
ancient fashion, in order to light the cell, which, if Strabo is to be
believed, was capable of accommodating thirty thousand persons.

In the time of Demetrius Phalereus, the immediate successor of
Alexander, Philo, or Philon, as his name is sometimes written, a
very eminent architect, also of Athens, was engaged to add a portico
of twelve Doric columns to this temple of Ceres. That Metagenes of
Xypete, and son of Ctesiphon, who has already been discussed in our
allusion to the temple of Diana at Ephesus, should be mentioned as the
architect who completed the entablature and an upper row of columns to
this Eleusian temple, is probably a mistake. The time of Metagenes was,
as we have seen, much earlier (about 560 B.C.), and while he might have
been engaged upon the first temple to Ceres at Eleusis, it is quite
impossible for him to have been employed by Pericles in the building of
that with which Ictinus had to do.

When Alaric, the German, made his angry invasion into Greece in 396
B.C., because refused command of the armies of the Eastern empire, he
destroyed very many works of Greek art, and this temple among them was
one of the unfortunates that assisted to satiate his wrath.

The third important work with which Ictinus is reported to have been
connected was the Doric temple to Apollo in the village of Bassæ, near
Cotylion, in Arcadia, which was known as the temple to Apollo Epicurus
(the Preserver). Pausanias speaks of this as being next to that at
Tagea, the finest temple in the Peloponnesus “from the beauty of its
stone and the symmetry of its proportions.” This temple is still a
beautiful ruin, thirty-four of the original thirty-eight columns of the
peristyle standing. The structure, which in the interior possessed two
rows of columns in the Ionic order, was originally admirably planned
for sculptural decoration and statuary and held many fine specimens of
the handiwork of Phidias and his school. Some of the carvings of the
frieze and other parts of the building, which are to be seen in the
British Museum, are spoken of by Lübke as the boldest and most animated
compositions among all that is preserved to us of the productions of
Greek art.

On the southeast slope of the Acropolis Pericles caused to be erected
a building which departed broadly from the prevailing rectangular
construction of the time. In was oval on plan, Doric in order, and its
portico was enclosed by thirty-two columns. The most original feature
of the building, however, was the roof, which was constructed in the
shape of a cone and was supported by rafters formed of the masts of the
ships captured in the Persian wars. From just above the cornice of the
drum there projected around the entire roof a row of windows which may
possibly be credited with being the archetypes of our modern dormer
windows. This building was called the Odeum, or, as it is now termed,
the Odeon, and was devoted to music.

Cratinus, the comic poet, who had levelled his satire at Pericles when
building the “Long Walls,” found in the roof of the Odeon, the idea
for the cone shape of which, by the way, it is claimed the architects
borrowed from the pavilion of the King of Persia, another mark for his
shafts of ridicule. He sings:

    “As Jove, an onion on his head he wears;
     As Pericles, a whole orchestra bears;
     Afraid of broils and banishments no more,
     He tunes the shell he trembled at before.”

The allusion to an onion by Cratinus is explained when it is remembered
that on account of the peculiar, long shape of his head the poets
of Athens called Pericles _Schinocephalos_, or squill-head, from
_schinos_, a squill, or sea-onion. Another version of Cratinus’s satire
is given thus:

    “So, we see here,
     Jupiter Long-pate Pericles appear,
     Since ostracism time he’s laid aside his head,
     And wears the new Odeum in its stead.”

Music received a considerable share of attention in the education
of the Greeks, and such was the influence which it is said to have
possessed over the physical as well as the mental nature of the
people, that it was credited with being an antidote for many of the
infirmities of the body as well as the mind. The Odeon was therefore
an institution of considerable importance in Athens. Here Pericles
conducted in person the musical contests between the Choruses which
the wealthy citizens of Athens instituted, and awarded to the
winners the tripod-trophies, which as marks of special honor they
were permitted to place upon their monuments. A street in Athens was
devoted almost entirely to these choragic monuments, many of which were
architecturally most beautiful.

The architect of the Odeon of Pericles is not known, but after its
destruction by Aristion in the Mithridatic war, it was rebuilt by
Ariobarzanes II, Philopator, king of Cappadocia, in the original
form, who employed for the purpose the brother Roman architects,
Caius and Marius Stallius, together with a third architect by the
name of Menalippus, who recorded their connection with the building
upon the base of a statue which they erected in honor of their patron
Ariobarzanes. It is said that on certain days this later Odeon was used
as a grain market.

If in the Parthenon on the Acropolis the acme of Doric magnificence
was reached by Ictinus and Callicrates, there was another temple
located below the Acropolis, which by many is ranked as the peer of the
Parthenon, in its perfection of Doric symmetry and grace. This was the
building to which allusion has already been made as another example of
the genius and skill of Mnesicles, the slave-architect of the Propylæa.
It was dedicated to the founder of Athens, the adventurous Theseus, and
stood not only as a temple in his honor, but as a mausoleum for his
ashes.

Wordsworth, whose words of praise for the Propylæa have been quoted, is
also enthusiastic in his admiration of this second example of the skill
of the talented Mnesicles: “Such is the integrity of its structure and
the distinctness of its details that it requires no description beyond
that which a few glances might supply. Its beauty defies all; its solid
yet graceful form is, indeed, admirable; and the loveliness of its
coloring is such that from the rich, mellow hue which the marble has
now assumed it looks as if it had been quarried not from the bed of a
rocky mountain, but from the golden light of an Athenian sunset.”

Although the temple of Theseus was one of the more modest Athenian
temples in point of size, it has always ranked as one of the most
perfect of the Attic-Doric order, and stands to-day as one of the least
dilapidated among all that have existed of the beautiful edifices of
ancient Greece. Indeed, as it was supposed to have been begun before
the Parthenon, or in the time of Cimon, it is claimed by some writers
that Ictinus took it for his model, although the Parthenon was about
twice as large.

The Theseum was surrounded by columns, six at the front and rear and
thirteen on either flank. It was forty-five feet wide by one hundred
and four feet long. The building material was Pentelican marble,
which in the course of the centuries has taken on the soft yellowish
tinge which Bishop Wordsworth refers to. Ornamental sculpturing was
more sparingly employed than upon the Parthenon or some of the other
structures of the time, but such as was used was so judiciously handled
as to give the very noblest results. The sculpturing in the metopes of
the frieze and on the pronaos was the work of Phidias.

It was built after the battle of Marathon, and, it would seem, after an
awakening on the part of the Athenians to that high sense of obligation
toward their early hero, Theseus, which had slumbered for centuries.
It was due to the Delphic Oracle that his remains were brought back to
Athens from their long banishment in the island of Scyros, and given
honorable burial, the son of Miltiades being selected to execute the
Oracle’s decree. The occasion was made one of festivity and rejoicing,
and the entombment in the beautiful new temple one of sacrifice and
solemnity.

In closing this brief reference to the Theseum, the graceful lines from
Haygarth’s Greece, which so beautifully applaud it, may well be quoted:

    “Here let us pause, e’en at the vestibule
     Of Theseus’s fane—with what stern majesty
     It rears its pond’rous and eternal strength,
     Still perfect, still unchang’d, as on the day
     When the assembled throng of multitudes
     With shouts proclaim’d th’ accomplish’d work and fell
     Prostrate upon their faces to adore
     Its marble splendor. How the golden gleam
     Of noonday floats upon its graceful forms,
     Tinging each grooved shaft, and storied frieze
     And Doric triglyph! How the rays amidst
     The op’ning columns glanc’d from point to point
     Stream down the gloom of the long portico;
     Where, link’d in moving mazes youths and maids
     Lead the light dance, as erst in joyous hour
     Of festival! How the broad pediment,
     Embrown’d with shadow frowns above and spreads
     Solemnity and reverential awe!
     Proud monument of old magnificence!
     Still thou survivest, nor has envious time
     Impair’d thy beauty, save that it has spread
     A deeper tint, and dimm’d the polished glare
     Of thy refulgent whiteness. Let mine eyes
     Feast on thy form, and find at every glance
     Themes for imagination, and for thought;
     Empires have fallen, yet art thou unchang’d;
     And destiny, whose tide engulphs proud man
     Has roll’d his harmless billows at thy base.”

In the brilliant galaxy of great architects and sculptors of this
age, none shines more deservedly conspicuous by reason of true merit
and noble purpose than Polycletus of Argos, who is remembered more
as a statuary than by reason of his achievements in architecture. He
exercised his art between the years 452 and 412 B.C., and, like his
distinguished contemporaries, Myron and Phidias, was a pupil of the
Argive sculptor, Agelades. His celebrity has been compared to that
of his most famous brother pupil, Phidias, for the reason that while
Phidias gave the ideal standard in the portrayal of deities, Polycletus
created for all ages the perfect canon of the human form in art. This
he expressed in the figure of a youth holding in his hand a spear,
which was called the Doryphorus. In this figure the sculptor laid down
the rules of universal application with regard to the proportions of
the human body in its mean standard of height, breadth of chest, length
of limbs and so on. Socrates, according to Xenophon, went so far as to
place Polycletus on a level as a statuary, with Homer, Sophocles and
Xeuxis in their respective arts.

A similar anecdote to that told of Phidias, when he listened to the
criticisms of the public upon his colossal statue of the Olympian Zeus,
is also related of Polycletus. He is said to have made two statues,
one of which he perfected according to his own ideals, and the other
he exhibited to the public and altered according to the suggestions
volunteered. In due time he exhibited both publicly side by side. The
one he had himself made was universally admired, while that which he
had changed to suit the popular fancy was condemned. “You yourself,” he
exclaimed, “made the statue you abuse, I, the one you admire.”

One of his most celebrated works was the chryselephantine statue
of Hera, executed in his old age to rival the Athene and Zeus by
Phidias. Strabo considered that this statue equalled in beauty those
of Phidias, though it was surpassed by them in costliness and size. In
the respect that Polycletus followed the Homeric description of Hera,
and presented the goddess clothed from her waist down, he may be said
to have followed the precedent of Phidias; in other respects, however,
he drew upon his own fancy. Juno was seated upon a golden throne; her
head was crowned with a garland on which were worked the Graces and the
Hours; in one hand she held the symbolical pomegranate and in the other
a sceptre surmounted by a cuckoo, a bird sacred to Hera on account of
having herself been changed into that form by Zeus.

As an architect Polycletus will be found as the designer of the
theatre at Epidaurus, where was also located the beautiful temple
dedicated to Æsculapius, and which Pausanias pronounced to be superior
in symmetry and elegance to every other in Greece and Rome. It was
capable of accommodating twelve thousand spectators, and its ruins, as
well as those of the white marble circular Tholus, by the same artist,
are still to be seen in an unusual condition of preservation.

Among the other architects who have been variously mentioned as having
pursued their profession toward the close of this century, but who can
hardly take equal rank with those already alluded to, may be mentioned
Eupolinus, an Argive artist, who rebuilt the great Heræum at Mycenæ
after its destruction by fire in the year 423 B.C., the entablature of
which was ornamented with sculptures representing the wars of the gods
and giants and the Trojan wars; Cleœtas, who was one of the assistant
architects under Phidias, and whose chief claim to distinction is based
upon his construction of the starting place in the Olympian Stadium,
and Democopus Myrilla, who built the theatre at Syracuse. Vitruvius
also speaks of an architect and author of about this time—namely,
Silenus—who wrote on the Doric order.

It is difficult to close this chapter, in which but very superficial
reference has been made to the architectural lights of the golden
age of art in Greece, without glancing back at the magnificent city
of Athens, the grand product of much of their creative skill, with
feelings of regret that with all her numerous and noble monuments,
dedicated to gods and men, there is not one that bears the imprint of
its creator. We see in this glance forest-like colonnades of glittering
white columns; we see the House of the Five Hundred Senators, the
Tholus, the Hall of Hermæ, the Agora, the Pnyx, “where the Athenian
orator spoke from a block of bare stone;” the Stoic Hall, in which
philosophy was taught; the Prytaneum, where the loved laws of Solon
were preserved; the Lyceum, with its hundred columns from Lydia;
the Theatre of Bacchus and the Mausoleum of Tolus. We see temples
innumerable, the grandest of all those to Jupiter and Theseus; but
others of fascinating merit, those of Ceres and of Cybele and of Mars,
and of Vulcan, of Venus, of Æacus, of the Dioscuri, of Hercules, of
Diana Agrotera, of Bacchus Lunnæus, of Æsculapius, of Eumenides, and
that to Glory, erected with the booty from the glorious field of
Marathon, wherein stood the Venus of Phidias; and we see the Acropolis
towering above all, lending other magnificent architectural triumphs
to the ensemble; and although we see slabs among them “inscribed with
the records of Athenian history, with civil contracts and articles
of peace, with memorials of honors awarded to patriotic citizens or
munificent strangers,” we find no monument, whether in the time of
Pericles or later, inscribed with the name of Ictinus, or Hippodamus,
or Callicrates, or the poor slave, Mnesicles, who was saved by Minerva
to be forgotten by man.

[Illustration: Decoration]


FOOTNOTES:

[3] The decoration referred to was the work of the distinguished
painter Protogenes.




CHAPTER VII.

LATER GREEK ARCHITECTS.


The first architect as well as artist of decided merit who arose to
historic distinction at the beginning of the later Attic school, or
that which followed immediately upon the school of Phidias, and one
of the first to treat the Corinthian idea, then flowering into favor
with originality and artistic skill, was the deserving and accomplished
Scopas. Reference has already been made to this artist in connection
with the temple of Diana at Ephesus, for which, it is said, he
furnished the most beautiful of all the numerous columns with which
that temple was enriched. This statement is made without prejudice
to the great Praxiteles, who was contemporaneous with Scopas, and
who excelled him as a statuary, if he did not compete with him as an
architect.

A mistake of Pliny, which assigned Scopas to an earlier age, has
finally been corrected, and it has been settled that the period when
he exercised his art was between the years 395 and 350 B.C. Scopas
was a native of Paros, a subject island of Athens, and sprung from a
family which for several generations before his advent into the world
had practised the plastic arts. His descendants also walked in the same
artistic paths of life for many generations. Like Polycletus, with whom
he is most favorably compared, the architectural side of his career was
greatly eclipsed by that which displayed his genius as a sculptor.

His statues were numerous, and fortunately many of them still exist
scattered in various European museums and galleries. Among such of
his works considered the most interesting is the well-known series
of figures representing the destruction of the sons and daughters
of Niobe. In the time of Pliny these statues stood in the temple of
Apollo Socianus at Rome, and it was then a question whether they were
the works of Scopas or Praxiteles. In fact, many of the former’s
finest efforts have been attributed to the latter artist. Of this
group Schlegel says: “In the group of Niobe there is the most perfect
expression of terror and pity. The upturned looks of the mother, and
mouth half open in supplication, seem to accuse the invisible wrath of
Heaven. The daughter clinging in the agonies of death to the bosom of
her mother, in her infantile innocence can have no other fear than for
herself; the innate impulse of self-preservation was never represented
in a manner more tender or affecting. Can there on the other hand
be exhibited to the senses a more beautiful image of self-devoting,
heroic magnanimity than Niobe, as she bends her body forward that,
if possible, she may alone received the destructive bolt? Pride and
repugnance are melted down in the most ardent maternal love. The more
than earthly dignity of the features is the less disfigured by pain, as
from the quick repetition of the shocks she appears, as in the fable,
to have become insensible and motionless. Before this figure, twice
transformed into stone, and yet so inimitably animated—before this line
of demarcation of all human suffering the most callous beholder is
dissolved in tears.”

Another highly esteemed work of Scopas, which Pliny says stood in the
shrine of Cneius Domitius in the Flaminian circus in Rome, represented
Achilles conducted to the island of Leuce by the divinities of the sea.
It consisted of figures of Neptune, Thetis and Achilles surrounded
by Nereids sitting on dolphins and other large fish, and attended by
Tritons and sea monsters. In the opinion of Pliny, these figures alone
would have been sufficient to have immortalized the artist, even if
they had cost the labor of his entire life.

His statues of Venus, are, after all, perhaps the most remarkable of
his works in sculpture. One of these statues, if not the original,
is supposed to have been the prototype of one of the most celebrated
and beautiful portrayals of that charming deity in the world to-day.
Another to which Pliny gives particular prominence was that in which
the goddess is presented nude and which was found in the temple of
Brutus Callaicus in Rome. This statue, he adds, “would have conferred
renown upon any other city, but at Rome the immense number of works
of art and the bustle of daily life in a great city distracted the
attention of men.” It is probably this work of art, which is thought
by some to have been superior to that by Praxiteles, which, with some
modifications, is credited with being the model after which Cleomenes
fashioned the celebrated Venus de Medicis. Pausanias and Pliny mention
also other portrayals of Venus by Scopas, but it is left to Waagen
and some other critics to ascribe the celebrated statue of Aphrodite,
in the Louvre in Paris, and known as the Venus de Milo, to this great
sculptor and architect.

It is foreign to the purpose, however, to devote too much space to this
side of the art life of Scopas, but in treating of his connection with
the magnificent mausoleum which Artemesia erected at Halicarnassus, to
her husband, Mausolus, king of Caria, it will be argued doubtless that
the work of this artist on that famous mortuary monument, which ranked
as one of the seven winders of the world, was more in the line of a
decorative sculptor than of an architect.

In this undertaking Scopas was associated with three other
architectural sculptors—namely, Bryaxis, Timotheus and Leocarus—all of
whom were Athenians. Each took as his special work the decoration of
one side of the building, Scopas choosing the east or principal façade.
The north and south sides had a width of about sixty-three feet; the
east and west were not quite so wide.

Before outlining further the principal characteristics of the building,
it is only fair to say that the professional architects to whom is
due the credit for the plan of the structure were Phileus, an Ionian
whose name Vitruvius spells in a variety of ways, and Satyrus, whose
native city is not given, but who, according to the same authority,
wrote a description of the mausoleum. Phileus was also an author on
architecture, having written a volume on the Ionic temple of Athene
Polias at Priene, of which he was the designer, and which was one
of the most renowned buildings in Asia Minor, and a treatise on the
mausoleum, which was also located in that part of the globe. As for
Satyrus, whatever may have been the other public buildings of which he
was the architect, there is no record.

The mausoleum had a total height of one hundred and forty feet, and
in general appearance combined orientalism in tomb-structure with the
perfections of Grecian architectural grace and elegance. The tomb
was contained within a rectangular substructure. Above was an Ionic
peristyle temple with nine columns on each side and eleven at the ends.
The frieze was elaborately carved and decorated, and the roof, which
was pyramidal in form, gave the oriental cast to the entire building.
At the apex of the roof was a colossal marble quadriga, in which a
statue of the deceased king Mausolus appeared. It is said that in the
sculptures and carvings of the different sides the respective artists
strove to rival each other, and that although queen Artemesia died
before the tomb was finished the four artists were so interested and
absorbed in their work that they determined to complete it at their own
risk.

Up to the twelfth century after the Christian era this grand tomb stood
in a fairly good state of preservation, but soon after fell to pieces,
and was used from that time as a quarry by the Knights of St. John,
from which they took stone for the castles they built on the site of
the old Greek Acropolis. Later still much of the marble was taken to
repair their fortifications, and it is even said to make lime, showing
to what ignominious uses the very greatest of architectural glories may
finally come. However, some of the carvings have been redeemed from
the fortification walls and unearthed from other places in Budrun, the
modern Halicarnassus, to find a final resting place, let it be hoped,
in the British Museum. These rescued pieces of marble, of which there
are perhaps sufficient to reconstruct a quarter of the whole frieze,
though they are not continuous, are pronounced by competent judges to
be specimens of the work of the different artists, but there is no
means of determining which of them, if any, came from the chisel of
Scopas.

The temple of Athene Alea at Tegea in Arcadia, often a sanctuary for
fugitives from Sparta, was an architectural creation of Scopas, which
it would appear belonged to him exclusively. Of all the temples in the
Peloponnesus this is said by Pausanias to have been the largest as well
as the most magnificent. That observant traveller, however, must have
been carried away somewhat by his enthusiasm over its architectural
attractions in ascribing to it such great size, as its dimensions were
not more than one hundred and sixty-four by seventy feet, being very
much smaller than other Grecian temples.

The temple which Scopas built was not the first to the goddess to
occupy the same site, but followed a very much more ancient one, which
was destroyed by fire in the year 394 B.C. The tendency to introduce
the Corinthian order, which followed after the Peloponnesian wars, and
which continued to grow as Greece became more and more intermixed with
Roman ideas, is here early displayed. The columnar arrangement of the
temple was unusual; for the outside the Ionic style was used, there
being six columns at each end and fourteen on the sides; but on the
inside the Doric order was employed surmounted by the Corinthian. Both
pediments of the building were sculptured by Scopas or from his designs
under his immediate supervision. The pediment over the front portico
portrayed the chase of the Calydonian boar, and that in the rear the
battle of Telephus with Achilles; both being, according to Pausanias,
very animated compositions. The statue of the goddess Athene Alea,
contained in the cell, was carried off by the Emperor Augustus and
placed at the entrance of his new forum in Rome. Some fragments of the
pedimental sculptures have been discovered and placed in the British
Museum.

To Scopas, in co-operation with Praxiteles, is also attributed the
graceful and beautiful Choragic monument of Lysicrates, at one time
called “the lantern of Demosthenes,” from the mistaken supposition
that the great orator used it as a study—a very strange use when it
is remembered that the little structure possessed neither doors nor
windows. In its day this monument was the pride of the street of
Tripods, and it still stands one of the best preserved evidences of the
taste and skill of its designers.

In this monument the Corinthian style of decoration is displayed in its
perfection of grace, better, perhaps, than in any other structure of
that early time which is known to us. Stuart describes it as follows:
“The colonnade was constructed in the following manner: six equal
panels of white [Pentelic] marble, placed contiguous to each other on a
circular plan, formed a continued cylindrical wall, which of course was
divided from top to bottom into six equal parts by the junctures of the
panels. These columns projected somewhat more than half their diameters
from the surface of the cylindrical wall, and the wall entirely closed
up the intercolumination. Over this was placed the entablature and the
cupola, in neither of which any aperture was made, so that there was no
admission to the inside of this monument, and it was quite dark.”

The “flower,” or crowning ornament of the monument, was a particularly
graceful and beautiful arrangement of acanthus leaves and volutes,
and the roof was worked out with great delicacy and originality in
the form of a thatch of laurel leaves and Vitruvian scrolls. If there
was any apportionment of the work on this monument between Scopas and
Praxiteles, it would be interesting to know what it was.

Of the other architectural sculptors associated with Scopas in the
adornment of the tomb of Mausolus none is mentioned as having had any
other connection with architecture in a similar way, but all were
statuaries of distinction and high merit, who executed works in marble
or bronze, or both, that gave them prominence in their art. Among other
works by Bryaxis were five colossal statues in the island of Rhodes, of
which the celebrated “colossus of Rhodes,” however, was not one, and
also a statue of Apollo, which was destined for the temple of Daphnis
near Antiochus. The story is related that Julian the Apostate wished to
render to this figure peculiar worship and homage, but was prevented
from so doing by a miraculous destruction of the temple and statue by
fire. Clement of Alexandria asserts that Bryaxis was the artist of
many works ascribed to Phidias.

As to the share which Timotheus took in the decoration of the mausoleum
there is dispute among the Greek authorities, some ascribing his work
to Praxiteles; but there does not seem to be any just foundation for
the supposition that the sculpturing on the south side of the tomb
was by any other hand than that of Timotheus. As one of the great
statuaries of the later Attic school he was also among the most
prominent, his figure of Artemis being deemed worthy to be placed by
the side of the Apollo of Scopas, and the Latona of Praxiteles in the
temple which Augustus erected to Apollo on the Palatine. Other statues
of conspicuous merit are also ascribed to him by Pausanias and Pliny.

Leochares, the last of the quartette, was also inferior only to Scopas
and Praxiteles in his school of art. He was particularly skilful with
portrait-statues, the most successful of which were those of Philip
of Macedon, Alexander his son, Amyntas, Olympias and Eurydice, all of
which were made of ivory and gold, and were placed in the Phillippeion,
a circular building in the Altis at Olympia, erected by Philip in
celebration of his victory at Chæroneia. But the _chef d’œuvre_ of
Leochares was a bronze statue of the rape of Ganymede. Pliny says of
this work that the eagle seemed to be sensible of what he was carrying
and to whom he was bearing the treasure, taking care not to hurt
the boy through his dress with his talons. The original statue was
frequently copied both in marble and on gems, several of which copies
are still extant: one in the Museo Pio-Clementino, another in the
library of St. Mark in Venice, and still another figures in Stuart’s
Athens, as an alto-relievo found among the ruins of Thessalonica.

[Illustration: Decoration]




CHAPTER VIII.

THE ALEXANDRIAN ERA AND ROMAN SPOLIATION.


That epoch in the art life of the Hellenic people associated with
the influences arising out of the career and conquests of Alexander
the Great, which we have now reached, was one scarcely inferior in
interest to that of the time of Pericles. Overflowing as was the
great Macedonian leader’s love of art and great as was his ambition
to leave behind him lasting monuments that should fittingly stand for
the artistic culture of his time, still, for reasons arising partly
out of his own career and partly from the ever-changing impulses of
human feeling and taste, the art culture of his time must bow to the
superiority of that of the time of Pericles, if, in respect to those
other features of his leadership and accomplishment, to which history
gives a superior rank, his genius is eclipsed by none in the chronicles
of civilization.

Alexander’s short life, so active in conquest and war, and so much
of it passed away from European associations or even the influences
of colonial Greece, necessarily gave him little time for indulgence
in the arts at home, while it permitted him to manifest it to some
considerable extent in founding cities and rearing temples in foreign
lands. To this self-imposed banishment, accompanied, as it was, by
large armies brought from Greece and her colonies, and the intermixing
of her people with foreigners of new tastes and habits of mind, may be
attributed that change of art feeling at home which began to assert
itself about this time. On the other hand, however, its effect was
beneficial to the conquered countries in introducing a more elevated
art standard than had existed within them before.

Personally, Alexander manifested a keen appreciation of the arts;
whether founded upon the same sincerity as that which appeared more
natural to the character of Pericles is a question; but we find that
Praxiteles, Lysippus and Apelles, the great artists of his time, were
no less publicly honored or more highly flattered than were Phidias or
Polycletus in the days of Pericles. It is related as an evidence of
Alexander’s enthusiasm for art, that he compensated Apelles for his
celebrated portrait of him by ordering that the artist’s reward should
be _measured out in gold_ instead of being _counted_, an order which
perhaps quite as much illustrated the theatrical impulses of which he
could be guilty as the calm expression of a genuine appreciation.

Even had Alexander been spared, and had returned to Greece to continue
a long life of usefulness to his people, instead of having been cut off
in his prime at Babylon, although he might have done much more for art
than he did, still he could not have accomplished for it what had been
attained by Pericles. This may be argued from his birth, schooling and
the stronger trend of his mind, which led in very different directions.
The Macedonian had not certainly the traditions of art culture in his
veins, as was the case with the more polished Athenian, and being
fonder of the dazzlement of pomp and show, natural to a leader who from
infancy had been almost continuously associated with the accoutrements
and regalia of armies, it is not likely that whatever he might have
accomplished for art more than that which he actually did, would have
manifested that purity of ideal, as well as refinement of execution
which so marked and dignified the work of Pericles.

As there is always some time which must elapse before the tide, having
reached its flood, turns once more to slowly ebb, so was there a
time to be expressed in a few years when the plastic arts of Greece,
reaching their highest development in the age of Pericles, remained
stationary, before ebbing away to so-called Roman degeneracy, and the
mixed influence of various comparatively uncultured nationalities.

The Alexandrian epoch marks the beginning of this turning-point. The
decadence took almost as many successive generations to the time
when Corinth was sacked by the Romans in 146 B.C., and the Italian
soldiers cast their dice upon the pictures of Aristides, as it had
taken to advance in the earlier ages of Greece, to the time when the
chryselephantine statues of Zeus and Athene, by Phidias, were the
recognized perfect standards of godlike majesty and beauty, and the
Doryphorus of Polycletus was accepted as the criterion of human grace
and proportion.

Of course the standard by which the perfection of architectural dignity
and purity can be measured is largely one of individual taste and
preferment, as is sometimes evidenced by the conflicting judgments of
the best critical authorities, but if we accept the conclusions of
centuries of the highest criticism, we must be prepared to concede that
the arts to which we refer reached their zenith as stated. However,
the expression, Roman degeneracy, is much too severe a one, if taken
in other than a comparative sense; for, whatever Grecian architecture
may have lost in ideal æstheticism by reason of Roman interference, it
must be granted the Romans that their own evolution in the appreciation
of the arts and the accomplishments of architecture resulted in a
magnificence which, when compared with our own time, gives them rank
second only to the Greeks, from whom they borrowed so much, and whom
they did not scruple to rob of nearly all their portable art treasures.
“Among the innumerable monuments of architecture constructed by the
Romans,” says Gibbon, “how many have escaped the notice of history, how
few have resisted the ravages of time and barbarism! And yet even the
majestic ruins that are still scattered over Italy and the provinces
would be sufficient to prove that those countries were once the seat
of a polite and powerful empire. Their greatness alone or their beauty
might deserve our attention; but they were rendered more interesting
by two important circumstances, which connect the agreeable history of
the arts with the more useful history of human manners. Many of these
works were erected at private expense, and almost all were intended for
public benefit.”

But the burnishing of the Romans to the high polish which they finally
attained in the arts was a slow process, and one which met with many
interruptions, according as their rulers were individually affected by
a love of the artistic—a fact which in itself would show that art was
not an inherent quality in the Roman nature to the like degree that it
was in that of the Greek. To admire the Grecian æsthetic culture was
at first considered an evidence of effeminacy, and even Cato exclaimed
against the arts not seventeen years after the taking of Syracuse. The
Consul Mummius, in 146 B.C., some hundred years later, after the battle
which resulted in the capture of Corinth, proved very conclusively that
he had very little appreciation of the merit of the treasures he found
there, for he not only destroyed a great many, but shipped to Rome
many more, for the simple reason that, recognizing how much they were
prized by the Corinthians, he wisely saw that they might be useful in
Rome. This sacking of Grecian cities was quite popular, and the Roman
generals, in their conquests, seemed to strive which should bring
away to Rome the greatest number of statues and pictures. The elder
Scipio despoiled Spain and Africa, Flamius Sylla and Mummius exported
shiploads of the art of Greece, Æmilius despoiled Macedonia, and Scipio
the younger, when he destroyed Carthage, transferred to Rome the chief
ornaments of that city.

In fact, the Roman generals were remarkable as art pilferers, using the
spoils not alone to adorn their public buildings and institutions,
but in some instances their private houses and palaces as well. It is
related of Scaurus that he embellished his temporary theatre, erected
for a few days’ use, with no less than three thousand statues. He also
returned to Rome with all the pictures of Sicyon, one of the most
eminent schools of painting in Greece, on a pretence that they would
compensate for a debt due the Roman people. From this habit of drawing
on foreigners it finally came to pass that private citizens took the
fever and entered upon the luxury. None was earlier in the field than
the Luculli, particularly Lucius Lucullus. Julius Cæsar was personally
a great collector, his hobby being gems, while his successor, Augustus,
displayed an acute interest in Corinthian vases.

Augustus did much for the architectural adornment of Rome, and his
much-quoted remark to the effect that he found Rome a city of bricks
and left it one of marble, was, to a great degree, true. In fact,
Augustus manifested an æsthetic nature in many respects. Spence says,
speaking of the arts, that “the flavor of Augustus, like a gentle dew,
made them bud forth and blossom; and the sour reign of Tiberius, like a
sudden frost, checked their growth, and killed all their beauties.” Men
of genius were flattered, courted and enriched under Augustus, as they
were some four hundred years’ earlier in Athens under Pericles, with
the result that Vergil, Horace, Ovid and other poets of the greatest
merit sprung forward. Rome became in this age the seat of universal
government also, its wealth was enormous, its architectural decorations
numerous and splendid, and even its common streets were decked with
some of the finest statues in the world. Other great architectural
epochs of Rome were those of the time of Trojan and Hadrian. But as
evidence of the intermittent character of her art development, very
little was realized, as very little could be expected under the reigns
of such monsters as Tiberius, Caligula and Nero. To Nero, however,
we must accord some little credit in having built a very remarkable
architectural composition, although undertaken for no public benefit,
but to satisfy his own profligate vanity. His “Golden Palace,” built
under the direction of the architects Celer and Severus, the most
eminent of their time, was ranked as the most “stupendous” structure
of its kind in all Italy. The palace was built after the conflagration
during which Nero is supposed to have amused himself with a violin.
Tacitus tells us that it was ornamented in every part with “pearls,
gems and the most precious materials,” especially gold, which was used
in reckless profusion. In the centre of a court adorned with a portico
of three rows of lofty columns, each row a mile long, stood a colossal
statue of that colossal sensualist and wicked monarch, which was one
hundred and twenty feet in height. Vespasian tore down the whole of
this piece of architectural vanity, restored the land which it had
occupied and by which it was surrounded to the people from whom it had
been stolen, and erected in its place the great public Coliseum and the
magnificent Temple of Peace.

In alluding to the public palaces of amusement, Curio, a Roman Prætor,
some few years before the Christian era, is said to have built two
wooden theatres close together, which turned on pivots. During the
day they were turned away from each other, and different plays were
performed in each; then, with all the spectators, they were turned
together, forming an amphitheatre in which combats took place. The zeal
of the Roman architects to win popular favor by something novel and
striking was often very great. In Pompey’s theatre water was made to
run down the aisles, between the seats, in order to refresh spectators
in the heat of summer.

But that the Roman architects were not always as careful in the
inspection of the buildings under their supervision as they should have
been, and, like some of our modern architects, permitted their works
to be used when in an unsafe condition, is shown from the unfortunate
catastrophe which resulted in the unexpected tumbling to pieces of the
theatre of Fidenæ near Rome. This accident happened in the reign of
Tiberius, and the name of the architect who suffered banishment for his
neglect was Attilius. The theatre was built of wood, and out of fifty
thousand people who were injured in the collapse twenty thousand are
said to have died.

Of all the Roman emperors none is more interesting to the student of
Grecian architecture than Hadrian, who was a great admirer of Greece,
seeking to introduce the Hellenic institutions and modes of worship
in Rome, as well as the art, poetry and learning of Greece. He also
undertook to restore Athens, which had suffered greatly during the four
or five hundred years which had elapsed between his time and that of
Pericles, to something of her former architectural grandeur. Pope’s
couplet might have been Hadrian’s inspiration:

    “You, too, proceed! make falling arts your care,
     Erect new wonders and the old repair.”

Indeed, he caused to be inscribed upon the Arch of Honor, which he
erected in Athens, after the restoration, two inscriptions which,
if not in the best of taste, were in harmony with their author’s
self-love, of which he possessed no inconsiderable share. Upon that
side of the arch which faced the ancient city he wrote: “This is
Athens, the old city of Theseus,” and on that which fronted upon the
new city of his restoration and adornment was inscribed: “This is the
city of Hadrian, and not of Theseus.” In other words, the visitor was
expected to make his own comparison and perhaps draw the conclusion
intimated that Theseus was not, after all, to be compared with the
Roman Hadrian.

Hadrian’s particular penchant was architecture, and his predominant
vices were vanity and jealousy, both of which were manifested in
his practice of that art. The magnificent villa which he erected at
Tiber, where he spent his declining years, and the ruins of which
even now cover a space equal to a large town, would indicate this,
as well as the grandiose mausoleum which towered high above the
banks of the Tiber at Rome, and which is now depleted of much of its
statuary and ornamentation, the Christian church of Saint Angelo. The
treatment which he accorded Trajan’s great architect, the accomplished
Apollodorus, is still another evidence of his vanity.

Hadrian, like Louis I. of Bavaria, found delight in practising
personally the profession of architecture, and drew plans of buildings,
which the people thought was unbecoming a prince. Possibly this
objection was raised to discourage their ruler rather than the more
truthful one that his plans were not up to the high standard of his
time. However that may be, he insisted upon their being executed, and
it is said was rather pleased if the architects found fault with them.
But this was not the case with Apollodorus, whether because of what he
had accomplished for his predecessor Trajan, or because of professional
jealousy.

Apollodorus was the architect of the Trajan column, composed of only
twenty-four stones, although one hundred and twenty-eight Roman feet
in height, and the square which surrounded it, considered the most
beautiful assemblage of buildings then known. The relief carvings which
were wound spirally around the Trajan column like a ribbon, represented
the incidents of the expedition against the Darians. The column
supported a statue of Trajan, which Pope Sextus V. substituted for one
of Saint Peter. A greater absurdity can hardly be conceived than that
of placing a peaceful apostle over the warlike representations of the
Dacian war.

Apollodorus was also the architect and engineer of the great bridge
which stretched across the Danube in lower Hungary, which was formed
of twelve piers and twenty-two arches, said to have been the grandest
use of the arch in such works. Each arch was sixty feet wide and one
hundred and fifty feet high. The total height of the bridge was three
hundred feet and its length a mile and a half. Hadrian destroyed this
magnificent work, some say through fear of its use by barbarians,
others through jealousy. Perhaps the circumstances attending the death
of Apollodorus would point to the second reason as the true one.

Hadrian had made the drawings of the double temple of Venus at Rome,
which he submitted to Apollodorus, doubtless for his commendation
rather than his criticism. The architect saw at a glance that the
sitting figures of the two goddesses, Roma and Venus, which the Emperor
had introduced in the little temple, were out of proportion, and so
large that if they stood up they would bump their heads against the
roof, if they did not take it off entirely. He called the Emperor’s
attention to this fact with the result that Hadrian became very angry,
or pretended to be so, and Apollodorus lost his head for his frankness.

The favorite architect of Hadrian was Detrianus, to whom he entrusted
many of his most important undertakings. We find that he restored the
Pantheon of Agrippa, the Basilica of Neptune, the Forum of Augustus
and the Baths of Agrippina. As original works he designed the Mausoleum
of Hadrian, to which we have already alluded; the bridge of Ælius,
ornamented with its covering of brass, and supported by its forty-two
columns, terminating at the top with as many statues, and the villa at
Tivoli. He also erected many structures for his royal patron in Gaul,
among which was the Basilica Plotina, the most superb building in that
country, and again other buildings in England. The Roman wall from Eden
in Cumberland to Tyne in Northumberland, a distance of eighty miles,
which was built as a defence against the Caledonians, is attributed
to Detrianus. In Greece he embellished the famous temple of Jupiter
Olympus, and in Palestine he rebuilt Jerusalem, erected a theatre
and various pagan temples out of the stone from the Jewish temples,
and completed his sacrilege there by placing a statue of Jupiter on
the spot where Christ rose from the dead, and one of Venus on Mount
Calvary. A feat, however, which has perpetuated his fame quite as much
as any other of his professional achievements was the removing of
the colossal bronze statue of Nero, which stood in the court of the
“Golden Palace.” This difficult task he is said to have accomplished
without changing the erect posture of the huge figure, which, it will
be remembered, was one hundred and twenty-eight feet high, by the
assistance of twenty-four elephants.

In returning once more to the Greek architects who have been left,
while a rather garrulous ramble has been made into the architectural
personality of Rome, it may be well not to attempt to do so at once,
but to pause for a moment, since we are so far from the chronology of
our subject, while the reader makes the acquaintance of two Hellenic
artists who, in the time of Quintius Metellus, 147 B.C., found
professional employment in Roman territory.

Metellus was one of the first Romans to favor magnificent architecture
in his home capitol, and with the booty gathered in his Macedonian
campaigns he erected two temples in Rome, said to have been the first
temples built of marble in that city, one of which was dedicated to
Jupiter Stator, and the other to the white-armed Juno. The interiors
were profusely ornamented with the works of the great Grecian masters,
Praxiteles, Polycletus and Dionysius figuring largely.

The names of the architects which Metellus brought or imported from
Greece for this work were Saurus and Batrachus, who may possibly have
been Ionians, inasmuch as they employed the Ionic order. These temples
were restored in the Corinthian style, under Augustus, two hundred
years later, by Hermodorus of Salamis, who was also the architect of
the temple of Mars in the Flaminian Circus.

It is told of Saurus and Batrachus that they were so much pleased with
their work that they asked for no reward other than the privilege of
having their names inscribed on the temples. But as this honor was
denied them, they resorted to expedient to effect the same end. As
the name Saurus stood for lizard and Batrachus for frog, they carved
lizards and frogs on the temples, and were comparatively satisfied. A
rather absurd mistake occurred in respect to these two temples after
they were completed. It seems that nothing remained to be done but to
add the statues of Jupiter and Juno to each respectively; but by some
strange oversight the figure of Jupiter was erected in the house of
Juno, and that of Juno before the shrine of Jupiter. However, as the
two deities were rather closely connected by marriage, the mistake was
conveniently attributed to a whim of the gods and was not remedied.

[Illustration: Decoration]




CHAPTER IX.

THE ALEXANDRIAN ARCHITECTS.


The boldest, most ingenious and original architect who found favor in
the sight of Alexander the Great was undoubtedly Dinocrates, who, like
his august patron, was also a Macedonian, and to whom an allusion has
already been made in connection with the temple of Diana at Ephesus.

[Illustration: DINOCRATES BEFORE ALEXANDER THE GREAT.]

His very introduction into the notice and attention of his
distinguished fellow-countryman would tend to prove that Dinocrates
was a person of expediency, if nothing else. Let Vitruvius tell the
story: “Dinocrates, the architect, relying on the powers of his skill
and ingenuity, while Alexander was in the midst of his conquests, set
out from Macedonia to the army, desirous of gaining the commendation
of his sovereign. That his introduction to the royal presence might
be facilitated, he obtained letters from his countrymen and relations
to men of the first rank and nobility about the king’s person, by
whom, being kindly received, he besought them to take the earliest
opportunity of accomplishing his wish. They promised fairly, but were
slow in performing, waiting, as they alleged, for a proper occasion.
Thinking, however, that they deferred this without just grounds, he
took his own course for the object he had in view. He was, I should
state, a man of tall stature, pleasing countenance and altogether of
dignified appearance. Trusting to the gifts with which nature had
endowed him, he put off his ordinary clothing, and, having annointed
himself with oil, crowned his head with a wreath of poplar, slung a
lion’s skin across his left shoulder, and, carrying a large club in his
right hand, he sallied forth to the royal tribunal, at a period when
the king was dispensing justice.

“The novelty of his appearance excited the attention of the people,
and Alexander, soon discovering with astonishment the object of their
curiosity, ordered the crowd to make way for him, and demanded to know
who he was. ‘A Macedonian architect,’ replied Dinocrates, ‘who suggests
schemes and designs worthy your royal renown. I propose to form Mount
Athos into the statue of a man holding a spacious city in his left hand
and in his right a huge vase, into which shall be collected all the
streams of the mountain, which shall thence be poured into the sea.’

“Alexander, delighted at the proposition, made immediate inquiry if
the soil of the neighborhood were of a quality capable of yielding
sufficient produce for such a state. When, however, he found that all
its supplies must be furnished by sea, he thus addressed Dinocrates:
‘I admire the grand outline of your scheme, and am well pleased with
it; but I am of opinion he would be much to blame who planted a
colony on such a spot. For as an infant is nourished by the milk of
its mother, depending thereon for its progress to maturity, so a city
depends on the fertility of the country surrounding it for its riches,
its strength in population, and not less for its defence against an
enemy. Though your plan might be carried into execution, yet I think it
impolitic. I nevertheless request your attendance upon me, that I may
otherwise avail myself of your ingenuity.’ From that time Dinocrates
was in constant attendance on the king, and followed him into Egypt.”

Vitruvius does not explain why it was that Dinocrates singled out the
curious costume, or rather lack of costume, which he did to attract the
attention of Alexander. It was, in fact, the garb of an athlete. Among
the early Greeks a professional athlete was regarded as a person of
social distinction, and if a particularly successful one, a personage
to whom a statue might be erected, or upon whom other honors might
be conferred. In fact, the uniform of an athlete was, as a rule, a
passport to the best society. Dinocrates undoubtedly knew this, and as
he was seeking an _entré_ into the very highest court circles, he took
not an extraordinary method of gaining it.

Mount Athos, which the architect proposed to take as a basis for
what was really to be a gigantic statue of Alexander himself, was a
pyramidal mountain, at the extreme end of the Acte peninsula, having an
altitude of 6780 feet, and crowned with a cap of white marble, which
Dinocrates undoubtedly had in mind to utilize for a helmet. The country
surrounding the mountain was remarkable for its rural beauty, its
woods and ravines, and its people for their longevity. No wonder that
Alexander did not wish to disturb this peaceful neighborhood.

Alexander Pope, who has given us an admirable rhymed translation of
the songs of Homer, seems to have been greatly impressed with the
practicability of this remarkable idea of Dinocrates. Spence, the
author of “Polymetis,” was once discussing the incident which Vitruvius
relates with Pope, remarking that he could not see how the Macedonian
architect could ever have carried his proposal into execution, when
Pope at once replied: “For my part, I have long since had an idea
how the thing might be done; and if anybody would make me a present
of a Welsh mountain and pay the workmen, I would undertake to see it
executed. I have quite formed it sometimes in my imagination: the
figure must be in a reclining posture, because of the hollowing that
would be necessary, and for the city’s being in one hand. It should be
a rude, unequal hill, and might be helped with groves of trees for the
eyebrows, and a wood for the hair. The natural green turf should be
left wherever it would be necessary to represent the ground he reclines
on. It should be contrived so that the true point of view should be at
a considerable distance. When you are near it, it should still have the
appearance of a rough mountain, but at a proper distance such a rising
should be the leg, and such another an arm. It would be best if there
were a river, or rather a lake, at the bottom of it, for the rivulet
that came through his other hand to tumble down the hill and discharge
itself into the sea.”

Mrs. Baillie, in her “Tour on the Continent,” has also a comment to
make on this proposition of Dinocrates and recalls the fact that a
somewhat similar idea was advanced to Napoleon I. “It is somewhat
singular,” she says, “that Mr. Pope should have thought this mad
project practicable, but it appears that there are still persons who
dream of such extravagant and fruitless undertakings. Some modern
Dinocrates had suggested to Bonaparte to have cut from the mountain
of the Simplon an immense colossal figure, as a sort of Genius of
the Alps. This was to have been of such enormous size that all the
passengers should have passed between its legs and arms in a zigzag
direction.”

Another ingenious conception is attributed to Dinocrates in respect to
the temple of Diana, which he erected in the city of Alexandria for
Ptolemy Philadelphus, in memory of the sister-wife of that potentate,
Arsinoë. This relationship, by the way, is said to have been the first
ever formed, although it became quite common later in the time of the
Ptolemies. Arsinoë was much beloved by her husband, who not only called
an entire district in Egypt, Arsinoites, after her, but also gave
her name to several cities within his realm. Her features are still
preserved to us upon coins struck in her honor, and which represent her
crowned with a diadem.

When Dinocrates received the commission to erect a temple to so
highly esteemed and devotedly remembered a queen, he apparently set
his ingenuity to work to give birth to a novelty that should not only
please the king, but astonish his subjects. It finally matured in a
proposition to roof the proposed temple with loadstones, in order
that they might attract into the air an iron statue of Arsinoë. As the
figure of the queen would thus appear suspended in the air without
any apparent mundane reason, the inference could be drawn that it was
by the divine will. Some authorities say that the entire inner walls
of the temple were to have been lined with loadstones, so that the
statue might appear suspended in the very centre of the cell, touching
nothing. Fortunately, both Dinocrates and Ptolemy died before the
project could be executed, otherwise they might have been witnesses
to the miserable failure such a chimerical fancy must have proved if
attempted, as any modern electrician will attest.

When at Ectabana with Alexander, Dinocrates had still another
opportunity to display his resourceless originality, in directing the
obsequies of Hephæstion, which were of a most extraordinarily elaborate
nature, costing, it is recorded, 12,000 talents, or what would be
equivalent to over $1,300,000. Hephæstion was a Macedonian and a close
and warm friend of Alexander, accompanying the young king in a military
capacity throughout most of his early foreign campaigns. So attached
was Alexander to his friend that he not only showed him many marks of
his personal esteem, but bestowed upon him in marriage Drypetis, the
sister of his own bride, Statira. At Ectabana Hephæstion was attacked
by a fever which had a fatal termination after an illness of seven
days. Alexander’s grief over the loss of his brother-in-law was violent
and extreme, and is said to have found vent in the most extravagant
demonstrations. He ordered general mourning throughout the entire
empire, and Dinocrates to build a funeral pile and monument to him in
Babylon, where the body had been conveyed from Ectabana, at a cost of
$1,000,000.

But the richest occasion afforded Dinocrates to display to the
fullest his great talents and genius was the laying out of the city
which Alexander determined to found in Egypt, and which, bearing the
conqueror’s name, was destined to become the centre of the commercial
activity of the new empire. This great city, which rapidly grew to be
one of the most populous of ancient times, and which has maintained, if
not its original share of industrial supremacy, at least an important
existence throughout the ages that have elapsed from its nativity
to the present time, we cannot resist thinking was probably as much
the inspiration of Alexander’s favorite architect, realizing its
professional possibilities, as it was that of Alexander himself. Pliny
informs us that Dinocrates died before he could give the city the full
proportions which he had planned, but not certainly until its principal
features were executed.

Strabo, the “squint-eyed” geographer, gives a more circumstantial
account of the planning of the new city by Dinocrates and his powerful
and ambitious patron. It must have been indeed an interesting sight
to see the two Macedonians upon the plane which was selected for the
site of the city, laying out the streets and avenues, marking the run
of the walls that were to surround it, locating the different sites
where were to stand the public buildings, parks, palaces and temples,
and perhaps disputing and arguing over the questions that arose, as two
such dominant intellects might very naturally be supposed to do.

The basis of the plan were two main streets crossing each other at
right angles, each one hundred feet wide and lined with colonnades. The
other streets were to run parallel to these. Near the centre of the
proposed city was to be clustered the public buildings, the Museum and
the Serna, which subsequently contained an alabaster coffin in which
rested the remains of Alexander. Alabaster, which the Greeks obtained
from Thebes, was much used for mortuary purposes, as well as for
columns and statues.

Plutarch also describes the planning of the city as follows: “As
chalk-dust was lacking, they laid out their lines on the black, loamy
soil with flour, first swinging a circle to enclose a wide space, and
then drawing lines as chords of the arc to complete with harmonious
proportions, something like the oblong form of a soldier’s cape.
While the king was congratulating himself on this plan, on a sudden a
countless number of birds of various sorts flew over from the land and
the lake in clouds, and, settling upon the spot, devoured in a short
time all the flour, so that Alexander was much disturbed in mind at the
omen involved, till the augurs restored his confidence again, telling
him the city he was planning was destined to be rich in resources and a
feeder of the nations of men,” a prophecy which proved its truth in the
fulfilment.

Dinocrates was not, however, the only architect employed in laying
out so large a city, as might naturally be supposed, although he
was, of course, the governing one. How many more there were it would
be difficult to say, but there is record at least of two others,
both probably employed by the rapacious and unscrupulous Cleomenes,
whom Alexander left in Egypt as hyparch under Ptolemy Philadelphus.
Olynthius is the name given of one of these architects and Parmenion
of the other. The latter was entrusted more particularly with
the superintendency of the works of sculpture, especially in the
temple of Serapis, which, by the way, came to be called by his name,
Pharmenionis. Bryaxis is also credited with statuary work there.

Upon the island of Pharos, which was joined to the city of Alexander
by a wide mole, about three-quarters of a mile long, in which were two
bridges over channels communicating between the eastern and western
harbors, was built by Ptolemy Soter and his son in the year 282 B.C., a
most famous lighthouse and a very glorious ancestor of such guardians
of the coast as exist to-day.

This lighthouse was planned by Sostratus, another remarkable character
in the architectural roll of honor of those early times. He was a
native of Cnidus, a town in Caria in Asia Minor, to the south of Ionia
and Lydia, celebrated also as the birthplace of several other men
who rose to distinction in the early days of the Greek colonies as
mathematicians and astronomers. Cnidus was almost equally remarkable
in its possession of two famous works of the statuary’s art: one the
figure of a lion carved from a single block of Pentelic marble, ten
feet long by six feet wide, which was executed to commemorate the great
victory of Caria; the other a statue of Venus by Praxiteles, which
occupied one of the three temples to the goddess in that city. It is
said that Nicomedes of Bithynia was so fascinated by the rare beauty
of this figure that he offered to liquidate the debt of Cnidus, which
was by no means a small one, if the citizens would cede the statue to
him. They refused, however, to part with it at any price, esteeming
it one of the glories of their city. Cnidus contained many beautiful
architectural monuments, the ruins of which are still prominent.

Sostratus, the architect, was the son of Dexiphanes, and must not be
mistaken for any one of several other artists of the same name who
are conspicuously mentioned by the early writers. His first fame was
acquired through his connection with the celebrated so-called hanging
gardens which he built in his native country. They consisted of a
series of porticos or colonnades supporting terraces, surrounding an
enclosure, possibly the Agora of the city, and served as a promenade
for the inhabitants. Pliny says that Sostratus was the first to erect
anything of the kind. This statement may be excused, either because the
hanging gardens of Sostratus differed widely from the well-known ones
of Babylon, which antedated them by several hundred years, or because
Pliny forgot for a moment those of Semiramis.

Strabo, who was probably right in his judgment, thinks that the
greatest of Sostratus’s works was the towering lighthouse at Pharos,
which he built at a cost of about $900,000, although from its size
it would seem that it should have cost more. This colossal tower at
once took its place among the seven wonders of the ancient world. It
pierced the sky at a height of four hundred and fifty feet, or about
one hundred and seventy-five feet above the towers of the Brooklyn
Bridge and fifty feet above the torch with which the Goddess of
Liberty illuminates the harbor of New York. But its height alone was
not more marvellous than its other proportions, which were upon a
most extravagant scale. The ground story was hexagonal, the sides
alternately convex and concave, and each was one-eighth of a mile
in length. The second and third stories were each of the same form,
although decreasing in size; the fourth was square, flanked by four
round towers, and the fifth or top story was circular. A grand
staircase led through each story to the roof of the building, where
every night massive fires were lighted, revealing the sea for a hundred
miles.

When we consider that this colossal building was made entirely of
wrought stone—when we reflect upon the amount of labor involved in its
construction, its ponderous size and dizzy altitude—we cannot but
marvel at the extraordinary breadth of conception manifested by its
architect and builders and the tenacity with which they must have held
to the completion of their huge undertaking. It is not to be wondered
at that when Sostratus stood off and contemplated this mighty product
of his imagination and genius, after its completion, he should have
been actuated with the desire to have his name associated with it for
all time, and indelibly engraved somewhere upon its imperishable stone.
The story is that Sostratus engraved an inscription upon one of the
stones which he afterward covered with cement, and on the cement he
inscribed the name of Ptolemy, knowing that in time the cement would
decay and leave exposed the hidden writing upon the stone beneath.
Strabo says that the concealed inscription read: “SOSTRATUS, THE FRIEND
OF KINGS, MADE ME;” but Lucien gives it differently, thus: “SOSTRATUS
OF CNIDUS, THE SON OF DEXIPHANES [that he might not be mistaken for any
other Sostratus, doubtless], TO THE GODS THE SAVIORS FOR THE SAFETY OF
MARINERS.”

Pliny does not share the opinion that the inscription was a concealed
one, but speaks of the incident as a special instance of the
magnanimity of Ptolemy, that he should not only have allowed the name
of the architect to be inscribed upon the building, but that he should
have also left its nature and language to the discretion of Sostratus.
The words “Gods the Saviors,” he believes, referred to the reigning
king and queen, with their successors, who were ambitious of the title
“Soteros” or Savior.

It would be unfair, perhaps, to the great Grecian architects of the
time of Alexander if Andronicus Cyrrhestes were to be classed among
them, and Cyrrhestes also, having been a scientific character with
a leaning toward astronomy, might with some justice feel aggrieved
were he to know that he was to be considered in a category of
professional men to which his calling was in no degree related. Still
the little building which he designed and erected in Athens is such an
interesting one, and has always held so prominent a place among the
architectural treasures of the Attic city, that it might be regarded as
an intentional oversight to leave him out in a book of this kind. Some
authorities place this building as belonging to the time of Alexander
the Great, others believe that it was erected at a later period, and
one writer gives Andronicus an existence as late as 100 B.C.

This building, which Delambre speaks of as “the most curious existing
monument of the practical gnomonics of antiquity,” has sometimes been
called the “Tower of Æolus.” Let us see what Vitruvius has to say
regarding the winds and the building: “Some have chosen to reckon only
four winds: the East, blowing from the equinoctial sunrise; the South,
from the noonday sun; the West, from the equinoctial sun-setting; and
the North, from the Polar Stars. But those who are more exact have
reckoned eight winds, particularly Andronicus Cyrrhestes, who on this
system erected an octagon marble tower at Athens, and on every side of
the octagon he has wrought a figure in relievo, representing the wind
which blew against that side; the top of this tower he finished with
a conical marble, on which he placed a brazen Triton, holding a wand
in his hand; this Triton is so contrived that he turns with the wind,
and always stops when he directly faces it, pointing his wand over the
figure of the wind at that time blowing.”

It is in connection with his allusion to the tower of Cyrrhestes,
and his description of how to construct a sun-dial, that Vitruvius
gives some valuable hints as to the way the ancients laid out a city
so that its streets were protected from the prevailing winds. He
says: “Let a marble slab be fixed level in the centre of the space
enclosed by the walls, or let the ground be smoothed or levelled, so
that the slab may not be necessary. In the centre of this plane,
for the purpose of marking the shadow correctly, a brazen gnomon
must be erected. The shadow cast by the gnomon is to be marked about
the fifth ante-meridional hour, and the extreme point of the shadow
accurately determined. From the central point of the space whereon the
gnomon stands, as a centre, with a distance equal to the length of
the shadow just observed, describe a circle. After the sun has passed
the meridian watch the shadow which the gnomon continues to cast till
the moment when its extremity again touches the circle which has been
described. From the two points thus obtained in the circumference of
the circle describe two arcs intersecting each other, and through
their intersection and the centre of the circle first described draw
a line to its extremity: this line will indicate the north and south
points. One-sixteenth part of the circumference of the whole circle
is to be set out to the right and left of the north and south points,
and drawing lines from the points thus obtained to the centre of the
circle, we have one-eighth part of the circumference for the region
of the north, and another eighth part for the region of the south.
Divide the remainders of the circumference on each side into three
equal parts, and the divisions or regions of the eight winds will
be obtained; then let the directions of the streets and lanes be
determined by the tendency of the lines which separate the different
regions of the winds. Thus will their force be broken and turned away
from the houses and public ways; for if the directions of the streets
be parallel to those of the winds, the latter will rush through them
with greater violence, since from occupying the whole space of the
surrounding country they will be forced up through a narrow pass.
Streets or public ways ought therefore to be so set out that when the
winds blow hard their violence may be broken against the angles of the
different divisions of the city, and thus dissipated.”

This tower still stands a fairly well-preserved ruin, and retains many
of its original architectural features and decorations. There are
two entrances through distyle porticos, the capitals of the columns
presenting an original treatment of the Corinthian order. One of these
entrances is on the northeast side and the other on the southwest. On
the south side is a circular apsidical projection. This was probably
originally used for a reservoir to hold the water brought from the
spring Clepsydra, on the northwest of the Acropolis, which was employed
as the power to run a clepsydra, or water-clock, taking its name,
as may be inferred, from the spring. The remains of this clock are
still visible. The exterior of the building was also arranged as a
sun-clock, having lines engraved upon the different sides, with gnomons
above them, forming a series of sun-dials which indicated the time by
shadows. Thus were the people of Athens kept publicly posted as to the
time of day—by the sun when it shone, or by the water-clock when it was
obscured by clouds.

The character of the architecture, the proportions of the building, as
well as its secular uses, were all quite out of harmony with Grecian
art and methods, and are essentially Roman. As a similar structure
existed at one time in Rome, supposed to have been built by the same
scientist, the thought is naturally suggested that Cyrrhestes may have
been a Roman.

In closing this reference to the prominent architects of the
disintegrating period of Grecian history, it would seem that it only
remains to recall Philo, or Philon, as some of the writers have
preferred to call him, once more, who flourished about 318 B.C. As
there were several artists of his name who became conspicuous at about
the same time, our Philo will be distinguished from the others in being
a native Athenian.

The reader will probably remember that he has been already mentioned
as the architect employed by Demetrius Phalerus, to build a portico of
twelve Doric columns to the great temple of Ceres and Proserpine at
Eleusis, originally erected by Ictinus; but his most ambitious work
was probably the armory, so called, which he designed for Lycurgus in
the Piræus, and which it is said was large enough to contain the arms
for one thousand ships. He was also engaged in enlarging the port of
Piræus, and was the architect of the white marble theatre at Athens,
which was finished by Ariobarzanes, and many years afterward rebuilt by
Hadrian. Vitruvius says that he also designed a number of Greek temples.

Philo must have been a man of considerable versatility, for it is
related that in giving an account of his work at Piræus “he expressed
himself with such precision, purity and eloquence that the Athenian
people—excellent judges of those matters—pronounced him equally a
fluent orator and an admirable architect.” He wrote also several works
on the architecture of temples and one on the naval basin which he
constructed in the Athenian port.


THE END.




INDEX OF ARCHITECTS AND ARCHITECTURAL SCULPTORS.


  Æacus, 27

  Agamedes, 42, 63

  Agnaptus, 89

  Antimachides, 80

  Antiphilus, 89

  Antistates, 80

  Apollodorus, 19, 158

  Athenis, 87


  Batrachus, 162

  Bryaxis, 140, 145, 174

  Bupalus, 87


  Calleschros, 80

  Callicrates, 105, 114

  Callimachus, 53, 58

  Calos (_see_ Perdix).

  Cannia, Luigi, 82

  Celer, 155

  Chersiphron, 38

  Cleœtas, 133

  Corœbus, 123

  Cossutius, 81

  Ctesiphon, 68

  Cyrrhestes, Andronicus, 178


  Dædalus, 30

  Damophilus, 86

  Daphnis, 74, 77

  Demetrius, 74, 77

  Detrianus, 19, 160

  Dibutades, 37

  Dinocrates, 19, 76, 164


  Eupolinus, 133

  Eurycles, 89


  Gaudentius (_Note_), 17

  Gitiadas, 41

  Gorgasus, 86


  Hermocreon, 89

  Hermodorus, 163

  Hermogenes, 55

  Hermon, 89

  Hippodamus, 105


  Icarus, 32

  Ictinus, 19, 107, 114, 123


  Lacrates, 89

  Leochares, 140, 146

  Libon, 82, 84


  Megacles, 89

  Menalippus, 127

  Metagenes, 68, 124

  Mnesicles, 19, 112, 128

  Mutianus, 76

  Myrilla, Democopus, 133


  Olynthius, 173


  Parmenion, 173

  Peonius, 74, 77

  Perdix, 31, 36

  Phileus, 140

  Phidias, 13, 85, 90, 98, 115, 131

  Philo, 123, 182

  Philocles, 121

  Polycletus, 13, 131

  Polycritus, 37

  Porinus, 80

  Pothæus, 89

  Praxiteles, 13, 74, 136, 144

  Pteras, 37

  Pyrrhus, 89

  Pytheus, 57


  Rhœcus, 19, 38


  Satyrus, 140

  Saurus, 162

  Scopas, 58, 74, 136

  Severus, 155

  Silenus, 133

  Smilis, 38

  Sostratus, 174

  Spintharus, 65

  Stallius, Caius, 127

  Stallius, Marius, 127


  Talos (_see_ Perdix).

  Tarchesius, 57

  Theodorus, 19, 38, 70

  Timotheus, 140, 146

  Trophonius, 42, 63


  Vitruvius, 20, 49, 68, 71, 79, 83, 164, 170




  Transcriber’s Notes

  pg 25 Changed: The Cyclopses, who belonged to Pelasgic times
             to: The Cyclopes, who belonged to Pelasgic times

  pg 91 Changed: breaking out of the Poloponnesian war
             to: breaking out of the Peloponnesian war

  pg 105 Changed: Hippodamus was one of the genuises of his day
              to: Hippodamus was one of the geniuses of his day

  pg 113 Changed: and which yas called Splanchnoptes
              to: and which was called Splanchnoptes

  pg 161 Changed: his professional acchievements was the removing
              to: his professional achievements was the removing

  pg 172 Changed: which the Greks obtained from Thebes
              to: which the Greeks obtained from Thebes





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME OLD MASTERS OF GREEK ARCHITECTURE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


