The Project Gutenberg eBook of Canal Reminiscences
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Canal Reminiscences

Author: George William Bagby


        
Release date: July 20, 2020 [eBook #62708]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/62708

Credits: Produced by David E. Brown and The Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANAL REMINISCENCES ***

  CANAL
  REMINISCENCES:

  Recollections of Travel in the Old Days
  ON THE
  James River & Kanawha Canal.

  BY
  GEORGE W. BAGBY.


  RICHMOND:
  WEST, JOHNSTON & CO., PUBLISHERS.
  1879.




  _Copyright Secured._


  _Printed by
  Whittet & Shepperson,
  Richmond, Va._




Preface.


My first thought was to print these reminiscences in a newspaper. But
our papers are unable to pay for contributions. It was not so in the
former days. Well do I remember when the _Dispatch_ cheerfully gave
me its dollars, not merely for stories and sketches, but for trifles
like the “_Weekly Rekord uv amewsments_,” which I then kept, and which
seemed to please our good people of Richmond, who were then doing so
well in business that they were easily pleased. And truly in those
times they were a liberal, open-hearted set. So would they be now were
they able.

Will we ever see good times and plenty of money again? I think so.
And yet often I get very blue, apprehending still greater business
troubles, culminating in I know not what of civil disaster. It is
touching to me, going around, as I have had to do a great deal of
late, among our business men, to see their sad faces, and yet their
evident anxiety in the midst of worries and cares, to help one who
is even worse off than themselves. We have good stock here--men who
would honor any city in the land, and who make up a community in
which it is a pleasure to live. Here and there you find one, two, or
three close-fisted fellows, who dodge you for fear you will ask them
for something. That is to their credit, for it shows that they have
feeling and a sense of shame. And again you meet positive brutes, who
are not merely stingy and mean, but ill-mannered and under-bred to
boot. But these serve as foils to set off their better brethren to more
advantage; and I, for one, am not the man to abuse stingy people. They
have one magnificent trait to counterpoise their littleness--they pay
their debts, and pay them promptly. So, take it all in all, Richmond is
about as good a place to live in as a man will find on this globe, as
I have learned by playing book-canvasser,--an excellent school for the
study of men.

But shall we see better times? Why, yes, surely. They have begun
already in Troy, N. Y., the papers say. And I verily believe the
railway, which is to take the place of the canal, will do more than
all things else to bring back work for all and money for all of us
in our fair city of Richmond. Let us at least hope so. And with that
hope in view, I trust that these reminiscences of an obsolescent
mode of travel--which may have been delightful, but certainly was
not rapid--will give a few moments of pleasure to the friends of the
publishers and of the writer.

                                                                G. W. B.




Canal Reminiscences.


Among my earliest recollections is a trip from Cumberland County to
Lynchburg, in 1835, or thereabouts. As the stage approached Glover’s
tavern in Appomattox county, sounds as of a cannonade aroused my
childish curiosity to a high pitch. I had been reading Parley’s History
of America, and this must be the noise of actual battle. Yes; the war
against the hateful Britishers must have broken out again. Would the
stage carry us within range of the cannon balls? Yes, and presently
the red-coats would come swarming out of the woods. And--and--Gen.
Washington was dead; I was certain of that; what would become of us?
I was terribly excited, but afraid to ask questions. Perhaps I was
scared. Would they kill an unarmed boy, sitting peaceably in a stage
coach? Of course they would; Britishers will do anything! Then they
will have to shoot a couple of men first;--and I squeezed still closer
between them.

My relief and my disappointment were equally great, when a casual
remark unfolded the fact that the noise which so excited me was only
the “blasting of rock on the Jeems and Kanawha Canell.” What was
“blasting of rock?”

What was a “canell?” and, above all, what manner of thing was a “Jeems
and Kanawha Canell?” Was it alive?

I think it was; more alive than it has ever been since, except for the
first few years after it was opened.

Those were the “good old days” of batteaux,--picturesque craft that
charmed my young eyes more than all the gondolas of Venice would do
now. True, they consumed a week in getting from Lynchburg to Richmond,
and ten days in returning against the stream, but what of that? Time
was abundant in those days. It was made for slaves, and we had the
slaves. A batteau on the water was more than a match for the best four
or six horse bell-team that ever rolled over the red clay of Bedford,
brindle dog and tar-bucket included.

Fleets of these batteaux used to be moored on the river bank near where
the depot of the Virginia and Tennessee Railroad now stands; and many
years after the “Jeems and Kanawha” was finished, one of them used to
haunt the mouth of Blackwater creek above the toll-bridge, a relic of
departed glory. For if ever man gloried in his calling,--the negro
batteau-man was that man. His was a hardy calling, demanding skill,
courage and strength in a high degree. I can see him now striding
the plank that ran along the gunwale to afford him footing, his long
iron-shod pole trailing in the water behind him. Now he turns, and
after one or two ineffectual efforts to get his pole fixed in the rocky
bottom of the river, secures his purchase, adjusts the upper part of
the pole to the pad at his shoulder, bends to his task, and the long,
but not ungraceful bark mounts the rapids like a sea-bird breasting the
storm. His companion on the other side plies the pole with equal ardor,
and between the two the boat bravely surmounts every obstacle, be it
rocks, rapids, quicksands, hammocks, what not. A third negro at the
stern held the mighty oar that served as a rudder. A stalwart, jolly,
courageous set they were, plying the pole all day, hauling in to shore
at night under the friendly shade of a mighty sycamore, to rest, to
eat, to play the banjo, and to snatch a few hours of profound, blissful
sleep.

The up-cargo, consisting of sacks of salt, bags of coffee, barrels
of sugar, molasses and whiskey, afforded good pickings. These sturdy
fellows lived well, I promise you, and if they stole a little, why,
what was their petty thieving compared to the enormous pillage of the
modern sugar refiner and the crooked-whiskey distiller? They lived
well. Their cook’s galley was a little dirt thrown between the ribs
of the boat at the stern, with an awning on occasion to keep off the
rain, and what they didn’t eat wasn’t worth eating. Fish of the very
best, both salt and fresh, chickens, eggs, milk and the invincible,
never-satisfying ash-cake and fried bacon. I see the frying-pan, I
smell the meat, the fish, the Rio coffee!--I want the batteau back
again, aye! and the brave, light-hearted slave to boot. What did
he know about the State debt? There was no State debt to speak of.
Greenbacks? Bless, you! the Farmers Bank of Virginia was living and
breathing, and its money was good enough for a king. Readjustment,
funding bill, tax-receivable coupons--where were all these worries
then? I think if we had known they were coming, we would have stuck
to the batteaux and never dammed the river. Why, shad used to run to
Lynchburg! The world was merry, butter-milk was abundant; Lynchburg a
lad, Richmond a mere youth, and the great “Jeems and Kanawha canell”
was going to--oh! it was going to do everything.

This was forty years ago and more, mark you.

In 1838, I made my first trip to Richmond. What visions of grandeur
filled my youthful imagination! That eventually I should get to be a
man seemed probable, but that I should ever be big enough to live,
actually live, in the vast metropolis, was beyond my dreams. For I
believed fully that men were proportioned to the size of the cities
they lived in. I had seen a man named Hatcher from Cartersville,
who was near about the size of the average man in Lynchburg, but as
I had never seen Cartersville, I concluded, naturally enough, that
Cartersville must be equal in population. Which may be the fact, for I
have never yet seen Cartersville, though I have been to Warminster, and
once came near passing through Bent-Creek.

I went by stage.

It took two days to make the trip, yet no one complained, although
there were many Methodist ministers aboard. Bro. Lafferty had not
been born. I thought it simply glorious. There was an unnatural
preponderance of preacher to boy,--nine of preacher to one of boy. That
boy did not take a leading part in the conversation. He looked out
of the window, and thought much about Richmond. And what a wonderful
world it was! So many trees, such nice rocks, and pretty ruts in the
red clay; such glorious taverns, and men with red noses; such splendid
horses, a fresh team every ten miles, and an elegant smell of leather,
proceeding from the coach, prevailing everywhere as we bowled merrily
along. And then the stage horn. Let me not speak of it, lest Thomas and
his orchestra hang their heads for very shame. I wish somebody would
tell me where we stopped the first night, for I have quite forgotten.
Any how, it was on the left-hand side coming down, and I rather think
on the brow of a little hill. I know we got up mighty soon the next
morning.

We drew up at the Eagle hotel in Richmond. Here again words, and time
too, fail me. All the cities on earth packed into one wouldn’t look as
big and fine to me now as Main street did then. If things shrink so in
the brief space of a life-time, what would be the general appearance,
say of Petersburg, if one should live a million or so of years? This
is an interesting question, which you may discuss with yourself, dear
reader.

Going northward, I remained a year or two, and on my return the
“canell” was finished. I had seen bigger places than Richmond, but had
yet to have my first experience of canal travelling. The packet-landing
at the foot of Eighth street presented a scene of great activity.
Passengers on foot and in vehicles continued to arrive up to the moment
of starting. I took a peep at the cabin, wondering much how all the
passengers were to be accommodated for the night, saw how nicely the
baggage was stored away on deck, admired the smart waiters, and picked
up a deal of information generally. I became acquainted with the names
of Edmond & Davenport in Richmond, and Boyd, Edmond & Davenport in
Lynchburg, the owners of the packet-line, and thought to myself, “What
immensely rich men they must be! Why, these boats cost ten times as
much as a stage-coach, and I am told they have them by the dozen.”

At last we were off, slowly pushed along under the bridge on Seventh
street; then the horses were hitched; then slowly along till we passed
the crowd of boats near the city, until at length, with a lively jerk
as the horses fell into a trot, away we went, the cut-water throwing
up the spray as we rounded the Penitentiary hill, and the passengers
lingering on deck to get a last look at the fair city of Richmond,
lighted by the pale rays of the setting sun.

As the shadows deepened, everybody went below. There was always a
crowd in those days, but it was a crowd for the most part of our best
people, and no one minded it. I was little, and it took little room
to accommodate me. Everything seemed as cozy and comfortable as heart
could wish. I brought to the table,--an excellent one it was,--a school
boy’s appetite, sharpened by travel, and thought it was “just splendid.”

Supper over, the men went on deck to smoke, while the ladies busied
themselves with draughts or backgammon, with conversation or with
books. But not for long. The curtains which separated the female from
the male department were soon drawn, in order that the steward and
his aids might make ready the berths. These were three deep, “lower,”
“middle” and “upper;” and great was the desire on the part of the men
not to be consigned to the “upper.” Being light as a cork, I rose
naturally to the top, clambering thither by the leathern straps with
the agility of a monkey, and enjoying as best I might the trampling
overhead whenever we approached a lock. I didn’t mind this much, but
when the fellow who had snubbed the boat jumped down about four feet,
right on my head as it were, it was pretty severe. Still I slept the
sleep of youth. We all went to bed early. A few lingered, talking in
low tones; and way-passengers, in case there was a crowd, were dumped
upon mattresses, placed on the dining tables.

The lamp shed a dim light over the sleepers, and all went well
till some one--and there always was some one--began to snore.
_Sn-a-a-aw!_--_aw-aw-poof!_ They would turn uneasily and try to compose
themselves to slumber again. No use. _Sn-a-a-aw_--_poof!_ “D---- that
fellow! Chunk him in the ribs, somebody, and make him turn over. Is
this thing to go on forever? Gentlemen, are you going to stand this all
night? If you are, I am not. I am going to get up and dress. Who is he
anyhow? No gentleman would or could snore in that way.”

After a while silence would be restored, and all would drop off to
sleep again, except the little fellow in the upper berth, who lying
there would listen to the _trahn-ahn-ahn-ahn_ of the packet-horn as
we drew nigh the locks. How mournfully it sounded in the night! what
a doleful thing it is at best, and how different from the stage-horn
with its cheery, ringing notes! The difference in the horns marks the
difference in the two eras of travel; not that the canal period is
doleful--I would not say that, but it is less bright than the period of
the stage-coach.

To this day you have only to say within my hearing _trahn-ahn-ahn_,
to bring back the canal epoch. I can see the whole thing down to the
snubbing post with its deep grooves which the heavy rope had worn.
Indeed, I think I could snub a boat myself with very little practice,
if the man on deck would say “_hup!_” to the horses at the proper time.

We turned out early in the morning, and had precious little room for
dressing. But that was no hardship to me, who had just emerged from a
big boarding school dormitory. Still, I must say, being now a grown
and oldish man, that I would not like to live and sleep and dress for
twenty or thirty years in the cabin of a canal-packet. The ceremony
of ablution was performed in a primitive fashion. There were the tin
basins, the big tin dipper with the long wooden handle. I feel it
vibrating in the water now, and the water a little muddy generally;
and there were the towels, a big one on a roller, and the little ones
in a pile, and all of them wet. These were discomforts, it is true,
but, pshaw! one good, big, long, deep draught of pure, fresh morning
air--one glimpse of the roseate flush above the wooded hills of the
James, one look at the dew besprent bushes and vines along the canal
bank--one sweet caress of dear mother nature in her morning robes, made
ample compensation for them all. Breakfast was soon served, and all the
more enjoyed in consequence of an hour’s fasting on deck; the sun came
out in all his splendor; the day was fairly set in, and with it there
was abundant leisure to enjoy the scenery, that grew more and more
captivating as we rose, lock after lock, into the rock-bound eminences
of the upper James. This scenery I will not attempt to describe,
for time has sadly, dimmed it in my recollection. The wealth of the
lowlands, and the upland beauty must be seen as I have seen them, in
the day of their prime, to be enjoyed.

The perfect cultivation, the abundance, the elegance, the ducal
splendor, one might almost say, of the great estates that lay along
the canal in the old days have passed away in a great measure. Here
were gentlemen, not merely refined and educated, fitted to display a
royal hospitality and to devote their leisure to the study of the art
and practice of government, but they were great and greatly successful
farmers as well. The land teemed with all manner of products, cereals,
fruits, what not! negroes by the hundreds and the thousands, under wise
direction, gentle but firm control, plied the hoe to good purpose.
There was enough and to spare for all--to spare? aye! to bestow with
glad and lavish hospitality. A mighty change has been wrought. What
that change is in all of its effects mine eyes have happily been spared
the seeing; but well I remember--I can never forget--how from time to
time the boat would stop at one of these estates, and the planter, his
wife, his daughters, and the guests that were going home with him,
would be met by those who had remained behind, and how joyous the
greetings were! It was a bright and happy scene, and it continually
repeated itself as we went onward.

In fine summer weather, the passengers, male and female, stayed most of
the time on deck, where there was a great deal to interest, and naught
to mar the happiness, except the oft-repeated warning, “_braidge!_”
“_low braidge!_” No well-regulated packet-hand was ever allowed to say
plain “bridge;” that was an etymological crime in canal ethics. For the
men, this on-deck existence was especially delightful; it is _such_
a comfort to spit plump into the water without the trouble of feeling
around with your head, in the midst of a political discussion, for the
spittoon.

As for me, I often went below, to devour Dickens’s earlier novels,
which were then appearing in rapid succession. But, drawn by the charm
of the scenery, I would often drop my book and go back on deck again.
There was an islet in the river--where, exactly, I cannot tell--which
had a beauty of its own for me, because from the moment I first saw it,
my purpose was to make it the scene of a romance, when I got to be a
great big man, old enough to write for the papers. There is a point at
which the passengers would get off, and taking a near cut across the
hills, would stretch their legs with a mile or two of walking. It was
unmanly, I held, to miss that. Apropos of scenery, I must not forget
the haunted house near Manchester, which was pointed out soon after we
left Richmond, and filled me with awe; for though I said I did not
believe in ghosts, I did. The ruined mill, a mile or two further on,
was always an object of melancholy interest to me; and of all the locks
from Lynchburg down, the Three-Mile Locks pleased me most. It is a
pretty place, as every one will own on seeing it. It was so clean and
green, and white and thrifty-looking. To me it was simply beautiful.
I wanted to live there; I ought to have lived there. I was built for
a lock-keeper--have that exact moral and mental shape. Ah! to own
your own negro, who would do all the drudgery of opening the gates.
Occasionally you would go through the form of putting your shoulder
to the huge wooden levers, if that is what they call them, by which
the gates are opened; to own your own negro and live and die calmly
at a lock! What more could the soul ask? I do think that the finest
picture extant of peace and contentment--a little abnormal, perhaps,
in the position of the animal--is that of a sick mule looking out of
the window of a canal freight-boat. And that you could see every day
from the porch of your cottage, if you lived at a lock, owned your own
negro, and there was no great rush of business on the canal, (and there
seldom was) on the “Jeems and Kanawhy,” as old Capt. Sam Wyatt always
called it, leaving out the word “canal,” for that was understood. Yes,
one ought to live as a pure and resigned lock-keeper, if one would be
blest, really blest.

Now that I am on the back track, let me add that, however bold and
picturesque the cliffs and bluffs near Lynchburg and beyond, there was
nothing from one end the canal to the other to compare with the first
sight of Richmond, when, rounding a corner not far from Hollywood, it
burst full upon the vision, its capitol, its spires, its happy homes,
flushed with the red glow of evening. And what it looked to be, it was.
Its interior, far from belieing its exterior, surpassed it. The world
over, there is no lovelier site for a city; and the world over there
was no city that quite equalled it in the charm of its hospitality,
its refinement, its intelligence, its cordial welcome to strangers. Few
of its inhabitants were very rich, fewer still were very poor. But I
must not dwell on this. Beautiful city! beautiful city! you may grow to
be as populous as London, and sure no one wishes you greater prosperity
than I, but grow as you may, you can never be happier than you were in
the days whereof I speak. How your picture comes back to me, softened
by time, glorified by all the tender, glowing tints of memory. Around
you now is the added glory of history, a defence almost unrivalled in
the annals of warfare; but for me there is something even brighter
than historic fame, a hue derived only from the heaven of memory. In
my childhood, when all things were beautified by the unclouded light
of “the young soul wandering here in nature,” I saw you in your youth,
full of hope, full of promise, full of all those gracious influences
which made your State greatest among all her sisters, and which seemed
concentrated in yourself. Be your maturity what it may, it can never be
brighter than this.

To return to the boat. All the scenery in the world--rocks that
Salvator would love to paint, and skies that Claude could never
limn--all the facilities for spitting that earth affords, avail not to
keep a Virginian away from a julep on a hot summer day. From time to
time he would descend from the deck of the packet and refresh himself.
The bar was small, but vigorous and healthy. I was then in the lemonade
stage of boyhood, and it was not until many years afterwards that I
rose through porterees and claret-punches to the sublimity of the
sherry cobbler, and discovered that the packet bar supplied genuine
Havana cigars at fourpence-ha’penny. Why, eggs were but sixpence a
dozen on the canal bank, and the national debt wouldn’t have filled
a tea-cup. Internal revenue was unknown; the coupons receivable for
taxes inconceivable, and forcible readjustment a thing undreamt of in
Virginian philosophy. Mr. Mallock’s pregnant question, “Is life worth
living?” was answered very satisfactorily, methought, as I watched
the Virginians at their juleps: “Gentlemen, your very good health;”
“Colonel, my respects to you;” “My regards, Judge. When shall I see you
again at my house? Can’t you stop now and stay a little while, if it
is only a week or two?” “Sam,” (to the bar-keeper,) “duplicate these
drinks.”

How they smacked their lips; how hot the talk on politics became; and
how pernicious this example of drinking in public was to the boy who
looked on! Oh! yes; and if you expect your son to go through life
without bad examples set him by his elders in a thousand ways, you must
take him to another sphere. Still, the fewer bad examples the better,
and you, at least, need not set them.

Travelling always with my father, who was a merchant, it was natural
that I should become acquainted with merchants. But I remember very few
of them. Mr. Daniel H. London, who was a character, and Mr. Fleming
James, who often visited his estate in Roanoke, and was more of a
character than London, I recall quite vividly. I remember, too, Mr.
Francis B. Deane, who was always talking about Mobjack Bay, and who
was yet to build the Langhorne Foundry in Lynchburg. I thought if I
could just see Mobjack Bay, I would be happy. According to Mr. Deane,
and I agreed with him, there ought by this time to have been a great
city on Mobjack Bay. I saw Mobjack Bay last summer, and was happy.
Any man who goes to Gloucester will be happy. More marked than all of
these characters was Major Yancey, of Buckingham, “the wheel-horse of
Democracy,” he was called; Tim. Rives, of Prince George, whose face,
some said, resembled the inside of a gunlock, being the war-horse.
Major Y.’s stout figure, florid face, and animated, forcible manner,
come back with some distinctness; and there are other forms, but they
are merely outlines barely discernible. So pass away men who, in their
day, were names and powers--shadows gone into shadow-land, leaving but
a dim print upon a few brains, which in time will soon flit away.

Arrived in Lynchburg, the effect of the canal was soon seen in the
array of freight boats, the activity and bustle at the packet landing.
New names and new faces, from the canal region of New York, most
likely, were seen and heard. I became acquainted with the family of
Capt. Huntley, who commanded one of the boats, and was for some years
quite intimate with his pretty daughters, Lizzie, Harriet and Emma.
Capt. H. lived on Church street, next door to the Reformed, or as it
was then called, the Radical Methodist Church, and nearly opposite to
Mr. Peleg Seabury. He was for a time connected in some way with the
Exchange hotel, but removed with his family to Cincinnati, since when
I have never but once heard of them. Where are they all, I wonder?
Then, there was a Mr. Watson, who lived with Boyd, Edmond & Davenport,
married first a Miss ----, and afterwards, Mrs. Christian, went into
the tobacco business in Brooklyn, then disappeared, leaving no trace,
not the slightest. Then there was a rare fellow, Charles Buckley, who
lived in the same store with Watson, had a fine voice, and without a
particle of religion in the ordinary sense, loved dearly to sing at
revivals. I went with him; we took back seats, and sang with great
fervor. This was at night. Besides Captain Huntley, I remember among
the captains of a later date, Captain Jack Yeatman; and at a date
still later his brother, Captain C. E. Yeatman, both of whom are
still living. There was still another captain whose name was Love----
something, a very handsome man; and these are all.

In 1849, having graduated in Philadelphia, I made one of my last
through-trips on the canal, the happy owner of a diploma in a green
tin case, and the utterly miserable possessor of a dyspepsia which
threatened my life. I enjoyed the night on deck, sick as I was. The
owl’s “long hoot,” the “plaintive cry of the whippoorwill;” the
melody--for it is by association a melody, which the Greeks have but
travestied with their _brek-ke-ex_, _ko-ex_--of the frogs, the mingled
hum of insect life, the “stilly sound” of inanimate nature, the soft
respiration of sleeping earth, and above all, the ineffable glory of
the stars. Oh! heaven of heavens, into which the sick boy, lying alone
on deck, then looked, has thy charm fled, too, with so many other
charms? Have thirty years of suffering, of thought, of book-reading,
brought only the unconsoling knowledge, that yonder twinkling sparks
of far-off fire are not lamps that light the portals of the palace of
the King and Father, but suns like our sun, surrounded by earths full
of woe and doubt like our own; and that heaven, if heaven there be,
is not in the sky; not in space, vast as it is; not in time, endless
though it be--where then? “Near thee, in thy heart!” Who feels this,
who will say this of himself? Away thou gray-haired, sunken-cheeked
sceptic, away! Come back to me, come back to me, wan youth; there
on that deck, with the treasure of thy faith, thy trust in men, thy
worship of womankind, thy hope, that sickness could not chill, in the
sweet possibilities of life. Come back to me!--’Tis a vain cry. The
youth lies there on the packet’s deck, looking upward to the stars, and
he will not return.

The trip in 1849 was a dreary one until there came aboard a dear lady
friend of mine who had recently been married. I had not had a good
honest talk with a girl for eighteen solid--I think I had better
say long, (we always say long when speaking of the war)--“fo’ long
years!”--I have heard it a thousand times--for eighteen long months,
and you may imagine how I enjoyed the conversation with my friend. She
wasn’t very pretty, and her husband was a Louisa man; but her talk,
full of good heart and good sense, put new life into me. One other
through trip, the very last, I made in 1851. On my return in 1853, I
went by rail as far as Farmville, and thence by stage to Lynchburg; so
that, for purposes of through travel, the canal lasted, one may say,
only ten or a dozen years. And now the canal, after a fair and costly
trial, is to give place to the rail, and I, in common with the great
body of Virginians, am heartily glad of it. It has served its purpose
well enough, perhaps, for its day and generation. The world has passed
by it, as it has passed by slavery. Henceforth Virginia must prove her
metal in the front of steam, electricity, and possibly mightier forces
still. If she can’t hold her own in their presence, she must go under.
I believe she will hold her own; these very forces will help her.
The dream of the great canal to the Ohio, with its-nine mile tunnel,
costing fifty or more millions, furnished by the general government,
and revolutionizing the commerce of the United States, much as the
discovery of America and opening of the Suez canal revolutionized the
commerce of the world, must be abandoned along with other dreams.

One cannot withhold admiration from President Johnston and other
officers of the canal, who made such a manful struggle to save it. But
who can war against the elements? Nature herself, imitating man, seems
to have taken special delight in kicking the canal after it was down.
So it must go. Well, let it go. It knew Virginia in her palmiest days
and it crushed the stage coach; isn’t that glory enough? I think it is.
But I can’t help feeling sorry for the bull frogs; there must be a good
many of them between here and Lexington. What will become of them, I
wonder? They will follow their predecessors, the batteaux; and their
pale, green ghosts, seated on the prows of shadowy barges, will be
heard piping the roundelays of long-departed joys.

Farewell canal, frogs, musk-rats, mules, packet-horns and all, a long
farewell. Welcome the rail along the winding valleys of the James. Wake
up, Fluvanna! Arise, old Buckingham! Exalt thyself, O Goochland! And
thou, O Powhatan, be not afraid nor shame-faced any longer, but raise
thy Ebenezer freely, for the day of thy redemption is at hand. Willis
J. Dance shall rejoice; yea, Wm. Pope Dabney shall be exceeding glad.
And all hail our long lost brother! come to these empty, aching, arms,
dear Lynch’s Ferry!

I have always thought that the unnatural separation between Lynchburg
and Richmond was the source of all our troubles. In some way, not
entirely clear to me, it brought on the late war, and it will bring on
another, if a reunion between the two cities does not soon take place.
Baltimore, that pretty and attractive, but meddlesome vixen, is at the
bottom of it all. Richmond will not fear Baltimore after the rails are
laid. Her prosperity will date anew from the time of her iron wedding
with Lynchburg. We shall see her merchants on our streets again, and
see them often. That will be a better day.

Alas! there are many we shall not see. John G. Meem, Sam’l McCorkle,
John Robin McDaniel, John Hollins, Chas. Phelps, Jno. R. D. Payne, Jehu
Williams, Ambrose Rucker, Wilson P. Bryant, (who died the other day,)
and many, many others will not come to Richmond any more. They are
gone. And if they came, they would not meet the men they used to meet;
very few of them at least. Jacquelin P. Taylor, John N. Gordon, Thos.
R. Price, Lewis D. Crenshaw, James Dunlop--why add to the list? They
too are gone.

But the sons of the old-time merchants of Lynchburg will meet here the
sons of the old-time merchants of Richmond, and the meeting of the
two, the mingling of the waters--Blackwater creek with Bacon Quarter
branch--deuce take it! I have gone off on the water line again--the
admixture, I should say, of the sills of Campbell with the spikes of
Henrico, the readjustment, so to speak, of the ties (R. R. ties) that
bind us, will more than atone for the obsolete canal, and draw us all
the closer by reason of our long separation and estrangement. Richmond
and Lynchburg united will go onward and upward in a common career
of glory and prosperity. And is there, can there be, a Virginian,
deserving the name, who would envy that glory, or for a moment retard
that prosperity? Not one, I am sure.

Allow me, now that my reminiscences are ended, allow me, as an old
stager and packet-horn reverer, one last Parthian shot. It is this: If
the James river does not behave better hereafter than it has done of
late, the railroad will have to be suspended in mid-heaven by means
of a series of stationary balloons; travelling then may be a little
wabbly, but at all events, it won’t be wet.

                                                            G. W. BAGBY.




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Archaic or alternate spelling has been retained from the original.







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CANAL REMINISCENCES ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


