The Project Gutenberg eBook of The carriages at Shelburne Museum
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The carriages at Shelburne Museum

Author: Lilian Baker Carlisle


        
Release date: March 5, 2023 [eBook #70206]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: The Shelburne Museum, 1956

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/70206

Credits: WebRover, Stephen Hutcheson, Karin Spence and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARRIAGES AT SHELBURNE MUSEUM ***





                             THE CARRIAGES

                         _at_ Shelburne Museum


                      _By_ LILIAN BAKER CARLISLE


    [Illustration]

                  _Museum Pamphlet Series, Number 1_


                             PUBLISHED BY
                         THE SHELBURNE MUSEUM
                          SHELBURNE · VERMONT




                            COPYRIGHT 1956

                     BY THE SHELBURNE MUSEUM, INC.
                          SHELBURNE, VERMONT


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                BY THE LANE PRESS, BURLINGTON, VERMONT




_Can You Remember_ ...


In the 1900 United States census, there were listed 4,571
vehicle-constructing concerns. They employed 126,000 men and paid
yearly wages to the amount of $70,000,000. Fifty years later one or two
specialists still manufacture a limited variety of vehicles, but during
our lifetime the carriage trade has vanished.

Persons now living rarely conceive of themselves as a part of history
and seldom make provisions for the perpetuation of examples and data of
their era. Although most of the carriages that once crowded the roads
have disappeared, some fine examples still exist in America on large
estates in hay-filled barns and dusty carriage houses, and it is to
be hoped that these few remaining vehicles will be rescued and placed
in museums where they will be preserved for the generations that come
after us as living mementoes of our past. Even the printed material,
old carriage maker’s catalogues, plans, illustrated magazines,
scrapbooks, wall charts, technical and account books--once present in
every carriage maker’s shop, has all but disappeared. This material
is of great value to the researcher, librarian and curator at museums
which have made provisions for its preservation. Persons owning any
of these documents would be performing an act of public service in
offering this material to museums, libraries or historical societies so
that it too can be kept intact.

The collection of vehicles at the Shelburne Museum contains the
sleighs and carriages, light and heavy, formerly owned by the late
Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward Webb; also those given by Mrs. Richard V. N.
Gambrill in memory of her husband; gifts of single carriages or sleighs
from interested donors; and purchases made to secure representative
vehicles. Illustrated in this pamphlet, which is the first of the
Shelburne Museum series, are examples of many of the carriage types
on display. A complete listing of the other carriages will be found
on page 65. A later publication will depict and describe the farm and
commercial wagons, as well as the fine collection of sleighs.

“Setting up” a fine carriage in the last century was quite different
from purchasing a fine automobile today. Considerable knowledge was
required as to style of harness, liveries, purpose, details and
customs. The description of one of the most costly late 19th century
stables here in the United States reads like a tale from the Arabian
nights. The town coach barn of this owner contained a coach, a
brougham, a hansom, a runabout and an opera wagon, but the carriage
house at his country estate was awe-inspiring. It sheltered dozens
of vehicles of every sort, and a corps of stablemen was employed
to maintain these vehicles in first class condition. In 1905 this
collection was broken up and auctioned off to the hundreds who came
and went during the days of the sale. Newspaper accounts of the day
said that they were bewildered by the display of the victorias, the
park drags, the skeleton breaks, the two hundred sets of harness, the
magnificent monogrammed blankets for the horses and all the rest of the
accoutrements.

  [Illustration:

      SKETCHED FROM LIFE BY T. WORTH      LITH CURRIER & IVES, N. Y.

  ENTERED ACCORDING TO ACT OF CONGRESS IN THE YEAR 1869 BY CURRIER &
  IVES IN THE CLERK’S OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT COURT OF THE U.S. FOR THE
  SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

  FASHIONABLE “TURN-OUTS” IN CENTRAL PARK.

      NEW YORK     PUBLISHED BY CURRIER & IVES     152 NASSAU STREET]

The “carriage parade” was a daily event in every major American city
and New York’s vehicles thronged over the ten miles of fine carriage
roads in and around Central Park. Every afternoon between the hours
of four and five, fashionable society of New York “took the air.”
East Drive from the Mall south to Fifth Avenue and 59th Street was
lined with spectators, and in their polished carriages, attended by
their immaculate servants, the élite drove back and forth, passing and
re-passing each other. It is said that the first time they met each
other, they bowed ceremoniously, the second time they smiled, and the
third time they looked away. When warm weather came, society moved out
of the city en masse, and their carriages went along too. The summer
carriage parade at Newport, Rhode Island was reputed to be even finer
and more glittering than the New York “promenade on wheels.”

In the United States, it was not only the people of wealth and fashion
who owned carriages, and herein lies one of the great differences
in our attitude and that of the countries abroad. We developed
the rockaway, surrey, buggy and buckboard; vehicles that could be
produced inexpensively; vehicles that were light and practical with
a stripped-down functional look, yet for all their air of fragility,
possessed of great strength. We fashioned them so that a servant was
not required either to drive them or to maintain them; we built them
in such numbers and so well that the treatise on _Coachbuilding_
published in London in 1881 by J. W. Burgess noted:

   “The carriages of America are so different from our own and
   from those of Europe that they require special attention. It
   is quite possible that in the future their style may greatly
   influence carriages in all parts. The first noticeable trait
   in them is lightness.... Americans have adopted some of the
   shapes of Europe and the European mode on constructing the
   under-carriages, retaining their own method of making the pole
   and splinters, as giving greater freedom to the horses.

   “The cheapness (of their vehicles) is attained by making large
   numbers to the same pattern, by the use of (machinery) and by
   the educated dexterity of the American workman, always ready to
   adopt any improvement.”

Horse-drawn vehicles have played a vital part in the lives of civilized
peoples, and that period cannot pass for long without demanding the
attention of research scholars whose basic interest is to record
activities of the past for the benefit of the future.

Mr. and Mrs. J. Watson Webb, founders of the Shelburne Museum, have
assembled this collection of vehicles and placed it on display in the
hopes that it will play a part toward preserving for posterity the
examples of the coachbuilder’s art during the 19th and early 20th
centuries.

                                                LILIAN BAKER CARLISLE

    Shelburne, Vermont.
    April 1, 1956




                          _Table of Contents_


                                                     PAGE

    INTRODUCTION                                     iii

    CARRIAGES FOR AN OWNER’S DRIVING

      Mail Phaeton                                     1

      Spider Phaeton                                   2

      Cut-under Phaeton                                3

      George IV Phaeton                                4

      Basket Phaeton                                   6

      Miniature Phaeton                                7

      Curricle                                         8

      Chaise                                           9

      Doctor’s Gig                                    10

      Dog Cart                                        11

      Tandem Cart                                     12

      “Going-to-Cover” Cart                           14

      Shooting Cart                                   15


    NON-SPORTING CARRIAGES

      Brougham                                        16

      Landau                                          18

      Panel-boot Victoria                             19

      Skeleton-boot Victoria                          20

      Vis-à-Vis                                       22

      Private Omnibus                                 23

      Calèche                                         24

      Berlin                                          26

      Carroll Coach                                   28

      Formal Coach                                    29

      Irish Jaunting Car                              30

      Hansom Cab                                      31


    COACHING AND OTHER FOUR-IN-HAND VEHICLES

      Road Coach “Liberty”                            32

      Park Drag                                       34

      Road Coach “Defiance”                           36

      Skeleton Break                                  37

      Body Break with Perch                           38


    CARRIAGES OF AMERICAN ORIGIN

      Three-seat Surrey                               40

      Extension-top Surrey                            41

      Depot Wagon                                     42

      Coupé Rockaway                                  43

      Six-passenger Rockaway                          44

      Buckboard Phaeton                               45

      Pony Buckboard                                  46

      Double Buckboard                                48

      Triple Buckboard                                49


    UNCLASSIFIED VEHICLES

      Racing Sulky                                    50

      Skeleton Wagon                                  51

      Tub Cart                                        52

      Kentucky Breaking Cart                          54

      Concord Wagon                                   55

      Pleasure Wagon                                  56

      Canadian Calèche                                57

      Mountain Wagon                                  58

      Barge                                           59

      Schroon Lake Concord Coach                      60

      Concord Mud Wagon                               62

      Highland & Alpine House Concord Coach           63

    BIBLIOGRAPHY                                      64

    CATALOG                                           65


  [Illustration]


                            HORSESHOE BARN

This barn was the first structure erected on the Shelburne Museum
grounds. Copied from a barn located in the northern part of Vermont, it
was built of timbers from eleven different old Vermont barns and two
grist mills. It now houses the collection of carriages and is the only
building on the grounds that is not a preservation.

Each of the other twenty-four structures located on the twenty-five
acres has been chosen for its individual beauty or interest. Although
the buildings have been restored architecturally, they now serve as the
background for the lifetime collections of the founders and it is only
in the five homes that contemporary household furnishings have been
displayed.

Shelburne Museum is essentially a “collection of collections” and is
one of the newest of the outdoor country museums. It was founded in
1947 by Mr. and Mrs. J. Watson Webb, and has been chartered by the
State of Vermont as a non-profit educational institution.

Located on Route 7, just seven miles south of Burlington, Vermont, the
Shelburne Museum is open each year from May 15th to October 15th.




                   CARRIAGES FOR AN OWNER’S DRIVING


  [Illustration]


                             MAIL PHAETON

      _Dark green; cane work at back of seat. Trimmed in eggshell
                             broadcloth._

Styles in carriages, like women’s fashions, changed continuously.
Speaking of the mail phaeton, a massive, masculine pair-horse carriage,
the Duke of Beaufort in 1899 said: “They are much in use by noblemen
and gentlemen and frequently employed by bachelors for long posting
journeys in England as well as the Continent. They have almost reached
perfection in the hands of the builder, Peters.”

Just fourteen years later, Francis M. Ware wrote: “In phaetons, the
cumbrous and lumbering mail phaeton is as extinct as the dodo.”

The mail phaeton took its name from the mail coach and was
characterized by its wooden perch (the pole running from the rear to
the front axle) and mail coach springing. In England, these vehicles
were used to send out mail and parcels to the nearest point where the
royal mail coach passed.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_


  [Illustration]


                            SPIDER PHAETON

      _Black with red; canework at back of seat. Trimmed in blue
                             broadcloth._

In 1888, G. N. Hooper (feature writer for _Driving_ magazine)
wrote: “For some years the young men of fashion have driven a small
Stanhope phaeton. They are now giving place to spider phaetons, a sort
of Tilbury body on four wheels, with a neat little seat for the groom
behind, supported on branched irons; most of them have a folding head
over the front body.

“Those first made had a trembling and vibrating motion; but with more
solid construction ... they have become not only comfortable, but with
more refined designs and construction, more stylish in appearance. They
carry a lady and gentleman on the front seat comfortably, and the hind
seat is made of such size as to carry only one person, and the groom
runs no chance of having his dignity hurt by his master or one of his
friends having to sit beside him.”

This spider phaeton was built in Paris, France by Muhlbacher.

     _Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr. Richard
                            V. N. Gambrill_


  [Illustration]


                           CUT-UNDER PHAETON

          _Body painted dark green. Trimmed in tan whipcord._

A wide variety of carriages are known as phaetons, but usually the name
is given to an open vehicle with four wheels which is intended for
personal driving by the owner.

The name phaeton comes to us from classical mythology. Helios, the sun
god, had a son called Phaet(h)on who in attempting to drive the sun
chariot through the sky lost control of the horses and lest he burn up
the earth, was consequently struck down by a thunderbolt of Zeus.

The cut-under construction of this phaeton gave clearance to the wheels
when the vehicle turned in a small radius, or where sharp turns into
driveways or alleys were required. The skeleton rumble seat in the rear
was for the groom and the carriage would have been turned out with a
single horse of about fifteen hands, or a cob (a small plump horse).
Sometimes it might also have been horsed with a pair.


  [Illustration]


                           GEORGE IV PHAETON

    _Green body with cane work, green gear. Trimmed in tan serge._

Although there were other phaetons suitable for ladies’ driving,
according to Mr. Underhill, only the Peter’s ladies’ phaeton and the
George IV phaeton were considered adequate for park driving. Their
graceful outline demanded the smartest possible turning out, but no
vehicle was more accommodating in displaying the charming picture of
a beautiful well-dressed woman driving a brilliant well-mannered and
nicely rounded pair of matched horses, attended by a single groom in
immaculate livery.

However, Francis Underhill in his book _Driving for Pleasure_
warned “It may be well to state in connection with the George IV
phaeton that they are very expensive carriages, and there being
comparatively few persons owning stables which would admit of their
use, they will be found difficult to dispose of except at a very great
sacrifice.”

This George IV phaeton belonged to Mrs. W. Seward Webb and was built
for her about 1882 by Brewster and Company of New York.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]

The Peters’ ladies’ phaeton depicted in the old photograph above is
turned out à la grande daumont. This equipage took its name from the
Duc d’Aumont, a French leader of fashion both before and after the
French Revolution who introduced this style during the Restoration.
In this country it was presented to formal society at Newport, Rhode
Island by Mrs. August Belmont, wife of the Rothschild banker and mother
of Newport’s noted brothers, O. H. P. and Perry Belmont.

The lady’s driving phaeton (below) is harnessed in the simpler à
la demi daumont. The two carriages here illustrated are not in the
museum collection, but depict the alternate method of harnessing when
the postillion rides the near horse, or if four, the near leader and
wheeler.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                            BASKET PHAETON

      _Black with basket weave seat. Trimmed in blue broadcloth._

The pony basket phaeton was deservedly popular--especially with
women--as it required little skill to keep the body in order, was light
in weight and of small initial cost.

Prices and weights for the best make phaetons showed a wide variety,
depending upon which type was purchased. The schedule below was
published by James A. Garland about 1900 (_The Private Stable_):

      Type of Phaeton         Price        Weight in Pounds
    Basket (single)           $400               350
    Basket (pair-horse)        750               700
    Ladies’                   1150               800
    Mail                      1450              1200
    Spider                    1150               800

Light and airy in appearance, this basket phaeton was used by its owner
as a summertime vehicle. It was built by the Hume Carriage Company of
Amesbury, Massachusetts.

          _Gift of Mr. Arthur Brown, Tilton, New Hampshire._


  [Illustration]


                           MINIATURE PHAETON

 _Canework body painted black; wheels black with red striping. Trimmed
                          in black leather._

This little phaeton was made especially in a miniature size for Tom
Thumb of Bridgeport, Connecticut. P. T. Barnum first heard of the
perfectly-formed twenty-four inch sixteen pound child in 1842. He
secured his services for $3 per week and exhibited him at his New York
Museum. The child was exceptionally bright and Barnum undertook his
education, hiring a tutor and a French professor for him. Tom Thumb
with his parents, Barnum and the complete entourage sailed in 1844 for
Europe and the first of a number of prosperous tours. He became the
favorite of Continental royalty, as well as a pet at Buckingham Palace.

In 1862 Barnum contracted for the services of the perfectly formed
dwarf girl, Lavinia Warren, of Massachusetts, and the love marriage
of these two tiny people captured the romantic attention of every
American. Tom Thumb died when he was 45 years old--still tiny in
height, but by then a portly 70 pounds in weight.


  [Illustration]


                               CURRICLE

   _Body painted dark green; gear green. Trimmed in tan broadcloth._

James W. Burgess in 1881 in his treatise on _Coach Building_
pointed out that in the last years of the 17th and in the early years
of the 18th century “a vehicle much in fashion was the curricle,
which had been in use for some time in Italy where it was suspended
from leather braces. Springs were added by the French ... the English
altered the shape, giving the back a graceful ogee curve, improved the
hood and added a spring bar across the horses’ backs. It was a vehicle
of easy draught, and could be driven at great speed. Unfortunately it
was rather dangerous if the horses shied or stumbled, and this tended
to reduce the demand for it, although Charles Dickens used one as soon
as he could afford it, and Count D’Orsay had one made as late as 1836.”

This curricle, an extremely rare type of carriage, was built by
Brewster and Company of New York just before the turn of the 20th
century.


  [Illustration]


                                CHAISE

     _Body painted black. Trimming: black leather top and cushions
                         (restored in 1953)._

The chaise has been defined as a two-wheeled carriage for two persons
with a calash (folding) top and the body hung on leather straps or
thorough-braces.

This chaise was purchased from the descendants of Gen. John Stark
of Dunbarton, New Hampshire where the family homestead is located.
Tradition has it that Gen. Stark met the Marquis de Lafayette in
Concord, New Hampshire and drove him to the Stark home in this chaise
where Lafayette visited with Stark during his 1784 visit to America.

John Stark was one of the most colorful heroes of the Revolutionary War
and a special hero of Vermont, for it was at the Battle of Bennington
that Stark overwhelmingly defeated the British forces on August 16,
1777. “Bennington Battle Day” is Still celebrated every year in
Vermont, and is a state holiday.


  [Illustration]


                             DOCTOR’S GIG

            _Body painted black. Trimmed in black leather._

The gig was an exceedingly light vehicle and in reality was only a
chair fixed on shafts. Well adapted for traveling purposes, it was a
favorite of doctors and businessmen.

Of particular note is the method of springing used in this gig. Two
sloping members are bolted through the shafts to which are attached
the suspension leather braces. This ingenious form of suspension is
typically American and one which substituted for the heavier and
costlier methods of springing.

This gig belonged to Dr. Zacheus Bass of Middlebury, Vermont, who
practiced in Addison County from 1815 to 1881. He accompanied Vermont
troops to Plattsburgh, and during 1814 assisted in caring for the
wounded on Commodore MacDonough’s ship.

        _On loan from the Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont_


  [Illustration]


                               DOG CART

      _Olive green, picked out with yellow. Trimming: tan tweed._

The dog cart, when setters and pointers were used for pheasant and
partridge shooting, was a useful vehicle to transport the dogs to
distant shoots, but outlived its usefulness for this originally
conceived purpose. Over the years it changed its shape, with the high
wheels and lofty driver’s seat giving way to a low, rakish line. The
profile of the body varied also, sometimes sloping side lines were the
fashion; other years the upright line was in favor.

In 1883 a lever permitting the whole body of the vehicle to be moved
backwards or forwards was patented. This simple device, located
directly below the driver’s seat, allowed the driver to change the
center of gravity of his dog cart, depending upon whether two or three
persons were riding as passengers, thereby easing the load on the pony
or cob drawing the cart.

This dog cart was built by Fred F. French, carriage maker of Boston,
Massachusetts.

          _Gift of Mr. Arthur Brown, Tilton, New Hampshire._


  [Illustration]


                              TANDEM CART

  _Black body, yellow gear striped with black. Trimmed in tan cord._

Tandem driving (two horses, one behind the other) originated with
sportsmen in hunting countries who took their hunter to cover in
harness as the leader of two horses. He was expected to simply jog
along comfortably with the wheeler, or second horse, pulling the cart.
This custom of driving became popular and more or less of a sport in
itself.

Some authorities depreciated tandem driving, but Frederic Ashenden who
wrote the notes on tandem and four-in-hand driving for _The Private
Stable_ differed. He pointed out that it had always been his custom
to give a tandem pupil half a dozen lessons in four-in-hand driving
first before attempting tandem, for he felt the reins were more easily
handled with four. Francis W. Ware, author of _Driving_ agreed,
for as he said, a four would keep each other straight, but any bungling
with the reins would surely be communicated to the tandem team and
upset their work.

       _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. Seward
                                 Webb_


  [Illustration]


                            TANDEM DRIVING

“Let anyone while he is young and has strong and steady nerves, a quick
eye and patience to learn his business thoroughly, try it, and perhaps
he will not repent. Let him begin by learning the uses, places and
combination of the harness to the last buckle. Then if he can find a
good professor, let him sit beside him, watch, listen and learn....
Then he may go far and certainly might fare worse.” Major-General Sir
C. Teesdale.

  [Illustration]

These two photos showing Mr. J. Watson Webb driving the homemade tandem
practice cart were taken about 1903 in Shelburne, Vermont. The two
horses are Mary (leader) and Auburn Maid (wheeler).


  [Illustration]


                         “GOING-TO-COVER” CART

    _Black and white with red gear. Trimmed in eggshell corduroy._

This dog cart was one of the types approved for tandem driving by the
Tandem Club of New York. In design it was copied from a dog cart shown
in the print by C. C. Henderson entitled _Going-to-Cover_, which
has been described by authorities as a truly ideal sporting picture of
the tandem team. Originally the dogs would have been taken to cover in
the capacious boot which was ventilated on either side with louvered
spaces.

Tandem driving was practiced by the ladies as well as by gentlemen,
and in fact Lady Georgiana Curzon wrote the tandem chapter in
_Driving_, the volume on that sport written for the Badminton
Library of Sports and Pastimes, published in 1889.

This cart was built by Brewster and Company of New York.

     _Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr. Richard
                            V. N. Gambrill_


  [Illustration]


                             SHOOTING CART

  _Body painted black; wheels and gear yellow. Trimmed in tan printed
                   pinwale corduroy, black pattern._

This type of vehicle is also known as a Slat-side Phaeton and is
described by Francis C. Underhill (_Driving for Pleasure_) as a
modification of a vehicle used on the other side of the water in a
lighter construction. It is intended for private use in the country
with a team or a pair and would have been found among the vehicles in
the coach barn of a connoisseur of carriages. The body work on the
shooting cart is similar to that found on the four-wheel dog cart.

This cart was built in 1894 for Dr. Webb by Brewster and Company of New
York.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_




                        NON-SPORTING CARRIAGES


  [Illustration]


                               BROUGHAM

   _Body painted dark green, green gear. Trimmed in green leather._

The story of the origin of the brougham about 1837 was published in
1889 by George N. Hooper--at that time president of the Institute of
British Carriage Manufacturers. Lord Chancellor Brougham, lawyer,
orator, writer, innovator and originator of many ideas on many
subjects, took his plans for a refined and glorified vehicle similar to
the street cabs, just then making their appearance in London, to his
carriage maker who refused to produce the vehicle because it was light
and lacking in dignity in his estimation. A neighboring coachmaker
accepted the challenge of this new type of carriage and in gratitude
Brougham did his best to influence the world of fashion to purchase
this vehicle which revolutionized the old methods of carriage building
as regards lightness, handiness, ease of access and economy.

This brougham was built for Dr. and Mrs. Webb by Brewster and Company
of New York.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]

(Above) The brougham, formerly owned by Dr. Webb, parked outside
Trinity Episcopal Church in Shelburne, Vermont during the marriage
ceremony of Miss Frederica Webb and Mr. Ralph Pulitzer in October of
1905. After the wedding, Dr. and Mrs. Webb returned to their home at
Shelburne Farms in the brougham and the lower photograph shows the
carriage entering the home grounds.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                                LANDAU

    _Body painted dark green, black trim with straw color striping.
      Trimmed in dark green morocco leather and blue broadcloth._

The landau originated in the German town of that name and was used
from mid-18th century as a posting (traveling) or dress vehicle. About
1850, coachbuilders began to use the lighter elliptic springs on the
landau and the whole vehicle became more miniature in size. The landau
combined the virtues of both an open and close carriage, as the folding
heads could be dropped and the windows lowered.

Landaus with curved body lines were known as Sefton landaus and those
with angular lines as in this example were called Shelburne landaus
after the Earl of Shelburne who had the first of this pattern built to
his order.

This carriage was built by the famous Brewster and Company and belonged
to the Theodore Havemeyer family.

         _Gift of Mr. Henry O. Havemeyer, Mahwah, New Jersey._


  [Illustration]


                          PANEL-BOOT VICTORIA

      _Body painted black with black wheels. Trimmed in navy blue
                             broadcloth._

The victoria became the fashionable park carriage when in 1869 the
Prince of Wales imported one from Paris for his mother, Queen Victoria,
for whom the carriage was named. When she appeared in it for her
daytime drives, it soared in popularity. Known at first as the victoria
phaeton, it was in truth a faithful copy of the George IV phaeton with
a box added for the coachman to drive from. It was always turned out in
formal style and is somewhat of a symbol of the reign of Queen Victoria.

This carriage was built by Henry Hooker and Company of New Haven,
Connecticut, and tradition has it that both Presidents Arthur and
Harrison were passengers in it during their visits to New Hampshire.

Note the “slip linings” on the boot and the leatherette apron pulled
over the interior upholstery. These served as dust protection for the
finer vehicles in the coach barn.

      _Gift of Mrs. Charles E. Tilton, of Tilton, New Hampshire._


  [Illustration]


                        SKELETON-BOOT VICTORIA

  _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Trimmed in dark green._

The handsome victoria was well suited for the formal call and the
promenade on wheels. In 1877, Mrs. E. B. Duffey, in her _Ladies’ and
Gentlemen’s Etiquette_ book warned her readers that “morning calls
should not be made earlier than twelve noon, nor later than 5 P.M. and
the lady should be more richly dressed when calling on her friends than
for an ordinary walk.” A lady should “never lay aside her bonnet during
a formal call even though urged to do so.”

The rules were just as rigorous where her carriage was concerned. Her
coachman, stately in bearing, should be taller and more portly than the
footman, but he too should be of more than average height, thoroughly
well trained and preferably slim.

This victoria was built by Brewster and Company of New York in 1904.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]

Photos above and below were taken in the courtyard of the coach barn at
Shelburne Farms about 1905 and show the victoria turned out, ready for
a formal call.

Fine carriages were never neglected. Each vehicle was thoroughly washed
off as soon as it came in the coach barn; grit was carefully removed
from hinges and joints; only the finest chamois were used to wipe dry
the painted panels. Linseed oil was applied to the folding leather
tops, and all metal parts on lamps and moldings were kept brightly
polished. This was routine care in well-regulated stables.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                               VIS-À-VIS

  _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Trimmed in dark green._

The vis-à-vis was known as the sociable in England and appears with a
panel body (as in this example) or with a basket-work body. When it was
properly turned out, it was formally horsed with two horses of fifteen
hands each and carried either one or two “trim dapper servants,” the
groom being a trifle smaller and shorter, as it was not good taste to
have the groom or footman show more height on the box than the coachman.

     _Given by the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                            PRIVATE OMNIBUS

     _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Trimmed in green
                               leather._

The omnibus, one of the larger carriage types, was intended for owner
driving as well as coachman driving and could be used with two horses;
three horses abreast with an adjustment of the two poles, and for long
distances over heavy country roads; or (even though it did not class as
a proper four-in-hand vehicle) with four horses. At coursing and race
meets, the omnibus made an admirable and roomy grandstand.

The lazyback and cushion on the roof-seat were removed when the omnibus
was servant-driven unless the seat was needed for the transporting of
house servants. When the omnibus was temporarily transformed into a
four-in-hand and owner-driven, the servants in undress liveries rode
inside, with the owner and his guests occupying the box and roof-seats.

This omnibus was built in 1891 for Dr. and Mrs. Webb by Brewster and
Company, of New York.

     _Given by the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_


  [Illustration]


                                CALÈCHE

    _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Trimmed in morocco
                       leather and broadcloth._

The calèche was a grand carriage and belonged to the “state” order. As
Francis Underhill wrote in 1896: “It is not at all suited unless the
stable be supplied ... with numerous carriages. It is intended simply
for the most formal calling or for park work.” The horses required were
of the finest breeding, perfectly matched and with faultless manners.
The harness was elaborate and included breeching (that part of the
harness which passes around the hind quarters of the horse) and loin
straps.

This calèche was ordered in Paris, France by Dr. and Mrs. Webb in 1890
from the famed French carriage maker, Million et Guiet. It was used in
New York until about 1900 with the two superb Webb horses “Chilcat” and
“Chilcoot,” (17.1 and 17.2 hands respectively). After the death of one
of these perfectly matched big horses, the calèche stood unused in the
Webb coach barn for many years.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration: (Above) Watercolor of the calèche painted by Max
   Klepper about 1895.]

  [Illustration: (Below) Detail showing elaborate springing, carving
   and C springs at rear of calèche. Note buckle for tension adjustment
   of leather strap.]


  [Illustration]


                                BERLIN

  _Body painted dark olive green with deeper green trim, green gear.
                     Trimmed in green silk satin._

One of the first carriage forms, the berlin was invented about 1660 in
Germany, and much used on the European Continent for royal traveling
with two or four horses, two men on the box, two grooms standing on the
rear, and out-riders for protection.

When the berlin here illustrated was harnessed à la grande daumont, the
box was removed by loosening the bolts, and the mounted postillions
then drove from the two near side horses. The berlin was truly a
state carriage with its well-balanced lines and air of luxury without
ostentation.

This berlin was built for Dr. and Mrs. Webb in France by Million
et Guiet, and imported to America in 1890. It was used with the
marvelously matched Webb horses Chilcat (17.1 hands) and Chilcoot
(17.2) in New York.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]

On the festive occasion in October of 1905 for Miss Frederica V. Webb’s
wedding to Mr. Ralph Pulitzer, the berlin was harnessed à la grande
daumont, with Mr. J. Watson Webb on the leader and Mr. W. Seward
Webb, Jr. on the wheeler. This equipage, with the two brothers riding
postillion for their sister, brought the bride and groom home to
Shelburne Farms from Trinity Episcopal Church in Shelburne after the
ceremony.

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                             CARROLL COACH

    _Black with white striping; gear is black with yellow striping.
                    Trimming: gold-on-gold damask._

An unusually fine example of a private coach of the mid-19th century,
made to carry six persons in addition to the coachman and footman.

The woodcarving trim on this coach, which originally was owned by
George W. Carroll of Carrollton, Isle of Wight County, Virginia, is of
especial note. The carved double leaf motif is in keeping with the size
of the coach. The _Coach Makers’ Illustrated Hand-Book_ in its
chapter on woodcarving warned that “The coach and carriage of smaller
dimensions will not admit of great boldness in design, but every
portion requiring decoration will admit of a well-conceived design and
delicacy of workmanship.”

This coach has an unusual amount of white striping on the body and the
carving has been emphasized by the addition of a white outline.


  [Illustration]


                             FORMAL COACH

    _Body painted dark green with black top. Trimmed in dark green
     leather and broadcloth with dark green padded satin ceiling._

Traditionally, one of the first carriages in England was the coach
brought out of the Netherlands by a Dutchman as a gift to Queen
Elizabeth “who had been seven years a queen before she had any coach.”

The coach through the years maintained its place as the “chief of every
class,” and so while many vehicle-constructing concerns could add the
designation--“carriagebuilder”--after their business names, only a few
deserved the appellation--“coachmaker.”

This formal or dress coach was used in and around Bennington, Vermont.
It was built by Jas. Cunningham Sons & Co., Rochester, New York.

       _Gift of the directors of the Henry M. Tuttle Company, of
     Bennington, Vermont, in memory of Mr. Fred Stickles, for many
                   years president of that company._


  [Illustration]


                          IRISH JAUNTING CAR

                   _Body and wheels painted black._

Also known as outside car, Irish side car, jogging cart. In 1889, the
Duke of Beaufort writing his volume on _Driving_ for the Badminton
Library Series pointed out that “the outside car, so common in the land
of Ireland itself, has made little way elsewhere. It may be described
as a dog cart body hung sideways, but the similitude goes no further,
for it is suspended on a pair of low wheels which revolve inside, or
rather under the body.... The driver sometimes sits on a separate seat
in front and at other times on one of the side seats. To ride on or
drive an Irish car requires a certain amount of teaching, training or
practice. Visitors from other countries are very apt to be thrown off
into the road if the driver is humorous or lively and turns a street
corner quickly; any stranger who rides on an Irish car ought to be
advised to hold fast and not relax his hold till he has safely ended
his drive.”

This car was made in Dublin, Ireland for Mr. William C. Indicott who in
1930 presented it to Mr. Charles Sumner Bird.

           _Gift of Mr. Charles Sumner Bird of East Walpole,
                            Massachusetts._


  [Illustration]


                              HANSOM CAB

   _Body painted black; gear painted red. Trimmed in black leather._

Joseph Hansom, the inventor, patented this type of cab (which is the
shortened form of cabriolet) in 1834. Forder, another coachbuilder,
redesigned it in 1873 and it became a popular carriage for hire, both
in this country and in even greater numbers in England where it was
known as the “gondola of London.” Limited amounts of luggage could
be carried on top of the cab and in the space between the apron and
dashboard.

This hansom, as evidenced by the baggage rail on the roof, was a public
conveyance, but these vehicles also found a place in town stables as
private cabs during the latter years of the 19th century. Essentially a
man’s carriage for town use, they were often finished in flash colors.
The servant who drove the private hansom wore a dark cutaway, trousers
and high felt or derby hat. In cold weather he was supplied with a
cloth overcoat and a lap rug; in rainy weather an “upper benjamin” or
poncho-like garment in a waterproof material and a weather-apron to
protect his trousers.




               COACHING AND OTHER FOUR-IN-HAND VEHICLES


  [Illustration]


                         ROAD COACH “LIBERTY”

   _Body painted maroon and black, red wheels. Trimmed in leather._

This famous road coach LIBERTY was built in Paris by Million et Guiet
and is a reproduction of the old royal mail coaches used in England. It
was built especially for Mr. James Hazen Hyde, one of the outstanding
“whips” of the coaching revival, who had it brought over here and
ran it as a public road coach from Holland House in New York city to
Laurel-in-the-Pines, Lakewood, New Jersey.

In 1901 Mr. Alfred Gwynne Vanderbilt and Mr. Hyde made a record run in
the LIBERTY to Bellevue Hotel in Philadelphia from Holland House in New
York and return in the time of 19 hours and 35 minutes. Seventy-eight
horses spaced along the route were used in this record-breaking run.

The LIBERTY was also driven up the St. Bernard’s Pass to the Monk’s
Monastery in Switzerland by Mr. Hyde, a feat which more than justified
his claim to the title “gentleman coachman.”

          _Gift of Mr. J. Ford Johnson, New York, New York._

  [Illustration:

    (_Courtesy New York Historical Society, New York City_)

  (Above) Road coach LIBERTY crossing the bridge near Turkey Blue
  Ball, New Jersey on its New York-to-Lakewood run. Watercolor by
  Max Klepper painted 1903, one of a series of twelve showing the
  different views along the route. These paintings may be seen at
  the New York Historical Society--gift of Mr. James Hazen Hyde.]

  [Illustration: (Below) Pen and ink water color by Crafty
  showing the road coach LIBERTY in France. Gift of Mr. James
  Hazen Hyde to Shelburne Museum.]


  [Illustration]


                               PARK DRAG

  _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Interior trimming is in
           green leather; exterior trimming is in tan cord._

The park drag resembles the road coach but is a lighter vehicle and is
intended for four-in-hand driving by the owner-coachman for his own
amusement and that of his friends.

The Coaching Club of New York each year sponsored Meets for their
members. Sometimes these drives occupied an hour or so and the coaches
returned to point of departure and there separated; on other occasions
the coaches went to some out-of-town place for lunch or dinner and
returned independently.

Fairman Rogers in his _Manual of Coaching_ (1899) mentions the
placement of passenger load for these Meets: “The wife of the owner, if
he has one, takes the box-seat (with him); two ladies and two men on
the front roof-seat, the back of the hind roof-seat is turned down and
the two grooms are in the rumble ... in the case of mourning, when the
wife of a member does not, for that reason, wish to appear at the Meet,
a lady takes her place, or the load is made up of men only.”

  [Illustration]

“The only occasion on which the wife of the owner, if she is on the
coach at all, is not on the box-seat, is when a very distinguished
personage such as the President of the United States takes that seat on
the leading coach. If the owner is unmarried, the lady on the box is
usually one of his own family.”

The photograph above taken in Central Park, New York, shows Dr. and
Mrs. Webb on the box at the commencement of one of the Coaching
Parades. In the lower picture, Miss Frederica V. Webb (daughter of Dr.
and Mrs. W. Seward Webb) handles the “ribbons” for the Ladies’ Coaching
Parade. Her brother, Mr. J. Watson Webb, is on the box-seat with her.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration]


  [Illustration]


                         ROAD COACH “DEFIANCE”

     _Body painted black with red gear. Varnished interior; wicker
                                seats._

The DEFIANCE was built by Brewster and Company, New York for Mr. C.
Ledyard Blair, father of the donor, and belonged to him over a period
of nearly 50 years. Originally painted in his colors, primrose and
black, the coach was driven in many parades and on coaching club trips.
In 1935 Mr. Blair presented this coach to Mr. Richard V. N. Gambrill,
husband of the donor, and at that time it was repainted in the regular
Gambrill colors.

These coaches were copies of the earlier English mail coach and
each was given its own name. Points of departure, destination and
intermediate towns were painted in bright colors to a set pattern, and
the names “Vernon Manor, Peapack, Gladstone, Far Hills and Bedminster”
appear on this coach.

     _Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr. Richard
                            V. N. Gambrill_


  [Illustration]


                            SKELETON BREAK

           _Body and gear painted bright yellow with black._

The skeleton break (or brake) was used to exercise the four-in-hand
team and also for breaking the team to harness. The driver’s seat was
placed high and this offered him some protection in his dangerous task
of putting-to and subduing the horses when they first commenced their
team work. Youngsters or fresh horses would be put-to in double harness
to a break with an old and reliable specially trained “break horse” or
“schoolmaster.” An additional stable-helper would usually stand on the
front platform holding on behind the box so that he was free to jump
easily on or off as occasion demanded, thus leaving the driver free to
cope with his inevitable problems brought on by the high spirits of the
fresh “young one.”

This skeleton break was built by Brewster and Company of New York.

       _Gift of Mr. F. Ambrose Clark of Cooperstown, New York._


  [Illustration]


                         BODY BREAK WITH PERCH

   _Body painted dark olive green, green gear. Trimmed in tan cord._

The break (or brake) was a most useful adjunct to establishments where
four horses were kept, as it could be used to exercise the team, or as
an alternative to the road coach for four-in-hand work when the road
coach or drag would be considered too “dressy.” This type of break was
also known as a wagonette break.

It was most often used with four horses, although in the country the
unicorn team (three horses, one leader and two wheelers) was sometimes
used. The break was a most spacious, roomy and useful carriage for
station or other rough work. Here the seat length has been curtailed to
make room for the additional forward-facing seat which is removable.

This break was built by Brewster and Company of New York and the Webb
coat-of-arms has been incorporated on either side in the center spindle.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration: Photo above shows Dr. W Seward Webb with his son J.
Watson Webb on the box with him, and his daughter Frederica on the side
lengthwise seat. This picture of the body break was taken about 1886
or 1887 at Oakledge, the Webb home in Burlington, Vermont, before they
moved to Shelburne.]

  [Illustration: In the photograph below, taken about 1903 at Shelburne
Farms, the body break is harnessed with four of the first home-bred
half-breed hackneys out of native mares.]




                     CARRIAGES OF AMERICAN ORIGIN


  [Illustration]


                           THREE-SEAT SURREY

     _Body painted dark green, green gear. Trimmed in tan canvas._

Because of its great popularity the surrey was stocked even at
mail-order houses during the latter part of the 19th and early years of
the 20th century. As today there is an automobile for each American,
no matter what his financial standing, so in those days there was
a carriage manufactured especially for his needs, and one of the
mail-order houses advertised that its volume of business was so great
that it expected to make only $1 profit on its least expensive model.

The hit song of the musical comedy _Oklahoma_ was the “Surrey
with the Fringe on Top” and this vehicle, a particularly elegant and
sophisticated version of the surrey, answers that description.


  [Illustration]


                         EXTENSION-TOP SURREY

     _Body painted dark olive green, striped with red. Trimmed in
                                black._

The extension-top used on this surrey was later incorporated into the
early auto designs.

This surrey was built in Burlington, Vermont by J. R. and J. H.
Lockwood and was used in and around this community for many years by
the Wells family, who were connected with the manufacture of dyes and
patent medicine. The Wells and Richardson Company commenced business in
1872 and seven years later began an intensive advertising program for
their then little-known remedy, “Kidney-Wort.” In 1881 they invested
$150,000 in direct advertising--a phenomenal sum at that time, but the
sales justified the expenditure, as they mounted to over half-a-million
dollars that year. Wells and Richardson also manufactured Diamond Dyes
and “Improved Butter Color” and these products earned a world-wide
reputation for this Burlington, Vermont business concern.


  [Illustration]


                    DEPOT WAGON OR CURTAIN ROCKAWAY

   _Body painted black with red gear. Trimmed in black broadcloth._

There were many types of rockaways, but the distinguishing feature of
this vehicle is the roof which projected over the driver, assuring him
of some protection in inclement weather.

This depot wagon or curtain rockaway also has the enameled leather
curtains which could be rolled up on fine days, and yet dropped quickly
for protection if caught out in a shower. After a rain storm, the
curtains were dressed with sweet or sperm-oil rubbed on with a greased
rag, and with proper care, they proved durable and remained pliable for
many years.

This vehicle was used particularly to take guests to and from the
railway station in suburban Philadelphia, but it also served for
shopping expeditions. It was built by Horace Ervien, of Ogontz,
Pennsylvania.

          _Gift of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Lippincott, Jenkintown,
                             Pennsylvania_


  [Illustration]


                            COUPÉ ROCKAWAY

 _Dark green, striped with red. Trimmed with leather seat, green satin
                 roof interior and padded seat back._

The rockaway was a popular close carriage of both the affluent and not
so wealthy American family; in the year 1900, for instance, only 846
broughams (a comparable close carriage) were built as compared with
3,166 rockaways turned out that year.

This vehicle is elegantly fitted out with leather card case, as well
as clock case built into the interior lining. It was used by the Wells
family of Burlington, Vermont, and was a product of Kimball Brothers
Company, Boston; Z. Thompson & Bros. Builders, Portland, Maine. The
Wells monogram painted in red on the door panel adds an extra touch of
tasteful decoration.


  [Illustration]


                        SIX-PASSENGER ROCKAWAY

   _Body painted dark green. Trimmed in eggshell corded broadcloth,
       embroidered with green leaf motif on corded silk fabric._

Although in excellent condition, this rockaway is one of the older
vehicles in the collection and was used prior to 1858 by Gen. J. Watson
Webb. His daughter Catherine married James G. Benton of the U.S.
Army Ordnance Department in 1858, and the Bentons used the rockaway
when they lived in Washington, D. C. Benton, a West Point graduate,
was the author of many valuable reports on ordnance and wrote the
course of instruction in ordnance and gunnery used by the cadets at
the U.S. military academy. Col. Benton’s experiments on a new type of
rifled musket led to the development of the Springfield rifle, and he
superintended the construction of the early models of this gun at the
Springfield Armory where he served as commanding officer.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_


  [Illustration]


                           BUCKBOARD PHAETON

   _Natural color varnished body. Trimmed in tan cord, black leather
                                 top._

This buckboard was made by Joubert & White of Glens Falls, New York and
was used by Dr. Webb in this community for many years.

The natural varnished body was a deceptively simple vehicle finish.
In the _Coachmaker’s Illustrated Handbook_, published in 1875,
the chapter on painting pointed out the hazards of the clear varnish
finish: “The varnish can crawl, run, enamel, pit, blotch, sag down and
hang on the lower edge; smoke or cloud over; appear as though dust
had been dredged on it through a piece of fine mull, or gather up and
hang in heavy ridges or beads along the center part of the spokes and
other carriage parts. These irregularities will happen with the best
quality of varnish and with workmen of undoubted skill, and are caused
by atmospheric influences alone.” The English varnish was preferred by
carriage painters, for they believed it possessed a secret ingredient
which made it the finest available at that time.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_


  [Illustration]


                            PONY BUCKBOARD

   _Natural varnished body, yellow gear striped in black. Trimmed in
                           brown corduroy._

This buckboard was used by the Webb children and was pony-drawn. It was
made by J. B. Dubuc who was the Shelburne town blacksmith, and whose
smithy is now located at the museum, having been moved to the grounds
in January of 1956 from its location next to the railroad tracks.

Dubuc came to Shelburne in 1869 from Canada and with his capital of $55
and his trade as a blacksmith set himself up in business. He was the
owner of a livery stable, paint shop, harness and carriage shop and
operated the meat market here in Shelburne as a sideline. Retiring when
his health failed, he took an active part in town affairs, serving as
school director and town library treasurer.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

These two photos were taken at Shelburne Farms, Shelburne, Vermont in
the early 1890’s.

  [Illustration: Top photo shows J. Watson Webb (holding the reins)
  and W. Seward Webb, Jr., sons of Dr. and Mrs. Webb in the pony
  buckboard.]

  [Illustration: Lower photo shows Vanderbilt Webb, the other son of
  Dr. and Mrs. Webb with his dogs and the family coachman sitting in
  front of one of Dr. Webb’s buggies.]


  [Illustration]


                           DOUBLE BUCKBOARD

   _Body painted black; gear painted red. Trimmed in brown leather._

The true buckboard has been defined as a light four-wheeled vehicle
in which the body and springs are replaced by long, elastic boards,
supported at the ends directly by the axles. The driver’s comfort, as
well as that of his passengers, depended upon the resiliency of the
boards themselves, and the buckboard proved a far more comfortable
vehicle for long trips than might be expected.

This buckboard was used at the Kildare Club in the Adirondacks in the
1880’s. After this club was sold, the buckboard was used at Nehasane,
in Hamilton County, New York, a game preserve and hunting camp owned by
Dr. W. Seward Webb.

           _Gift of Mr. J. Watson Webb, Shelburne, Vermont._


  [Illustration]


                           TRIPLE BUCKBOARD

     _Body and gear in natural varnish finish. Trimmed with black
                               leather._

Single and double buckboards are often found, but this triple buckboard
is considered a rare example. It was made for Dr. E. D. Ferguson of
Troy, New York about 1885 to his order in Glens Falls, New York. It
descended to his grandson, the little boy sitting with his mother in
the rear seat of the buckboard in the old photo below, who gave it to
the museum in 1953.

       _Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Everard Childs, Manchester,
                               Vermont_

  [Illustration]




                         UNCLASSIFIED VEHICLES


  [Illustration]


                             RACING SULKY

                _Framework and wheels painted yellow._

This type of two-wheel cart was used for exercising and racing trotting
horses. Built as light as possible with practically no body work, these
sulkies were really mere frames supporting the single seat.

From mid-19th century, trotting parks and race tracks were established
in the New England states. These were the natural outgrowth of the
impromptu brushes between drivers on the road. The trot is the most
comfortable for the driver and the easiest gait for the horse in
harness, and then too the New England Puritan conscience could be
quieted with the explanation that light harness racing was in reality
an attempt to improve the breed of trotters. Races at local fair
grounds gave breeders a chance to see their home-grown stock in action
and competition with the “experts” on tour. A prize-winning performance
on the track always influenced prices, and many a farmer dreamed of
raising a trotter that would one day bring him real fame.


  [Illustration]


                            SKELETON WAGON

                    _Body and wheels painted red._

This light racing cart was found in Westford, Vermont and shows the
webbed seat and pencil-slim spokes of the early skeleton wagon.

Rural communities here in Vermont have enjoyed harness racing for many
years, and Bertha Oppenheim (_Winged Seed_) depicted the Fourth
of July races held in the early years of this century in Ferrisburg, a
small community just south of the Shelburne Museum. The brass band had
been engaged far in advance; ice cream and lemonade were on sale in the
refreshment tents; horses had been entered from as far away as Rutland
and Manchester, Vermont--and even from across the lake in New York
State. Hundreds of buggies and horses were hitched to fences everywhere
and Ford cars were parked on the sidelines too. The racing carts,
decorated with many colors, lined the track. The “trots” were exciting,
but the free-for-all race was the climax of the celebration.


  [Illustration]


                               TUB CART

      _Natural color varnish; metal-rimmed ties. Trimmed in brown
                               leather._

Each of the Webb children in turn learned to drive in this little cart
dating from about 1883 and made to Dr. Webb’s specifications by a local
wheelwright. Wheelwrights often made entire vehicles and served as
village carpenters.

Wheel-making consisted of several processes--the hub was first turned
by hand lathe and then mortised to take the spokes. Felloes or fellies
(the wooden outer rim of the wheel), cut by the bow saw and adzed to
shape, were then mortised and fitted to the spokes.

Fitting the outer rim to the completed wheel was the final operation.
In the old days the wheel was straked--that is, overlapping iron plates
were nailed to the rim of the wheel. About 1850 the hoop tire began to
supersede the strake. Here the length of iron was welded into a hoop,
heated so that it would expand and then dropped onto the wheel. It was
cooled with buckets of water and after shrinking made a tight, secure
metal rim for the wheel.

     _Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W. Seward
                                 Webb_

  [Illustration: (Above) The Webb head coachman holding the pony and
Frederica, aged 4 and J. Watson Webb, 2 years old, each with one of the
reins. Even before children could walk, they were given their first
driving and riding lessons.]

  [Illustration: (Below) Frederica has graduated. She is now 5 years
  old; her gentle pony is Frieda and she can drive alone. Both these
  pictures were taken at Oakledge, in Burlington, Vermont and show the
  little Tub Cart designed by Dr. Webb.]


  [Illustration]


                        KENTUCKY BREAKING CART

            _Body painted red. Trimmed with brown leather._

Not a carriage in the true meaning of the word, this type of vehicle
was intended solely for breaking horses. The very long shafts kept the
float body and its occupant at a comfortable distance from the heels
of the young horse being schooled, and because of the placement of the
seat, the driver was given better control and greater security. This
cart could also be used for exercising horses.

Manufactured by the H. H. Babcock Company of Watertown, New York.

            _Gift of Dr. Stuart Orton, Rahway, New Jersey._


  [Illustration]


                             CONCORD WAGON

               _Body originally painted old blue color._

The concord wagon was the name given to this type of vehicle, although
companies other than the Concord, New Hampshire firm of Downing and
Abbot manufactured them. In 1813 Lewis Downing started building
vehicles in Concord. He formed a partnership with Stephen Abbot,
which was later dissolved. Abbot continued manufacturing vehicles and
later a new company, Abbot-Downing Company of Concord, New Hampshire
was formed. Stage coaches, mountain wagons, horse-drawn barges, even
horse-drawn street railway cars were manufactured at the Abbot-Downing
shops over the years.

            _Gift of Mr. W. B. Hill, Tilton, New Hampshire_


  [Illustration]


                            PLEASURE WAGON

              _Green, red wheels, picked out with black._

This vehicle, with its light green acorn stencilled pattern, is one of
the oldest carriages in this collection. It was licensed in 1815 in
Vergennes, Vermont by Beldon Seymour. It is of hand construction and
follows the principles of early framing with the use of mortising and
pegging the parts together.

This carriage transported President James Monroe during his tour of
the Northern States in July of 1817, and Commodore MacDonough of Lake
Champlain fame was also a passenger in this vehicle that year.

In 1888 Mr. Sheldon of Middlebury purchased this wagon from a Mr.
Kellogg for $45 and presented it to the Sheldon Museum.

        _On loan from the Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont._


  [Illustration]


                           CANADIAN CALÈCHE

   _Body painted black; red and yellow striping; light grey wheels.
             Trimming: beige broadcloth with beige lace._

The Canadian calèche differs greatly from the French calèche, which is
a four-wheeled vehicle. The body of this two-wheeled Canadian example
rests upon leather braces which are suspended from C-shaped supports.

This vehicle displays an extensive use of striping for decoration,
but in a restrained manner. “The variety of styles in striping are
limited,” said I. D. Ware in his instructions to carriage painters in
1875, “When we discard those which lessen rather than increase the
beauty of the work. We first had the fine line enlivened by being
dotted at the ends of each stripe ... gradually changes took place in
the quantity of striping run on as the desire arose for gaudy colors.
Modest and retiring colors were in great measure abandoned, ushering in
straw, orange, red and crimson and these were followed and accompanied
with a perfect shower of gold leaf.”


  [Illustration]


                            MOUNTAIN WAGON

 _Body painted very dark green, striped in red; gear black. Trimmed in
                            black leather._

This mountain wagon was originally owned by the Mount Pleasant Hotel up
in the Crawford Notch, New Hampshire. At the turn of the century, these
elegant resort hotels in the White mountains used these wagons to take
their guests to the summit where an elaborate picnic lunch was served
to them.

Note the hand brake--it is exceptionally sturdy, for one of these
vehicles carrying its full quota of passengers weighed a considerable
amount, and checking the rate of descent of the steep mountain roads
was somewhat of a problem. This vehicle was built by the Abbot-Downing
Company of Concord, New Hampshire.


  [Illustration]


                                 BARGE

         _Green and yellow body, yellow gear. Lettering_ LADY
        OXFORD _in straw color shadow-outlined in red (recently
                             repainted)_.

Mr. Jabez W. Peterson, 75 years old in 1954, was the driver of this
barge from 1908 to 1918 when it carried passengers to the Brant Rock
Beach section from the Marshfield, Massachusetts depot. The barge was
built in Concord, New Hampshire by the Abbot-Downing Company and was
one of 6 or 8 that regularly plied the beach circuit. Baggage was
carried free, and the income from this barge, according to Mr. Peterson
amounted to $1,000 in one month at 35¢ fares. Three or four trips were
made every day, including Sunday. Sam and John, Genevera and Pete,
four sorrel horses with white manes and tails, pulled the LADY
OXFORD.

“I drove that barge in all the parades,” said Mr. Peterson, “and
carried the bands, Grand Army men, etc. All these older men have passed
on, and I believe I am the only one left that would remember about that
barge.”


  [Illustration]


                      SCHROON LAKE CONCORD COACH

  _Body painted yellow with orange trim. Interior is russet leather._

The Concord coaches have become a more familiar sight, perhaps, to the
youngsters of today than to their parents, for television with its Wild
West movies has made the Concord the trademark of the west.

The opening of the gold fields in California--the Comstock Lode, the
Nevada silver camps--the famous Wells Fargo saga--all these were made
possible because of the Concord coach. The men who drove the coaches
and their exploits have become the folklore of America.

Until the completion of the transcontinental railroad, the two choices
open to a traveller to the west were the long and arduous voyage by
sea around the Cape of Good Hope or the equally dangerous trip by
stagecoach over the towering mountains and down precipitous grades.
Rigid time schedules were maintained; the six horses used on many
of the stages were pushed to their capacity, and the drivers who
trekked over the Sierra Nevada made the Placerville grade the busiest
thoroughfare west of the Rockies. Dozens of Concord coaches rolled on
daily schedules and scaled the heights of 7200 feet as a matter of
course.

The Concord was of the same body form as the oldtime English coaches
of the 18th century. The two lengthwise “thorough-braces” fashioned
of several strips of leather stitched together, absorbed some of the
shock. The body hung on these braces with the driver’s seat high in
front and an integral part of the coach. Inside there was room for 9
passengers (though often more were crowded in) and the capacity of the
coaches was 4,000 lbs. The bodies were rounded and smoothly curved with
drop windows and painted decorations of eagles, scrolls and pastoral
scenes. Curtains and upholstery were most often of russet leather.

There was another version of the Concord coach--similar in appearance,
but specifically designed for the Eastern part of the United States and
of lighter construction. These coaches were the connecting links to the
railroads until a surprisingly recent time. Such a model is the one
illustrated below. It was operated by Waddel & Emerson and ran between
the railroad station at Riverside, New York, and the steamboat landing
on Schroon Lake, near Pottersville. From there, passengers took the
steamer _Evelyn_ to the village of Schroon at the head of the lake
or intermediate points.

  [Illustration: Photo--Gift of Mr. Albert Jacob, Jr. Scarsdale, New
York--showing the Schroon Lake coach at intersection of Routes 8 and 9
at Loon Lake in the Town of Chester, Warren County. Photo taken about
1907 or 1908.]


  [Illustration]


                           CONCORD MUD WAGON

     _Body painted Indian red, remnants of yellow paint on gear._

This type Concord, known as the California mud wagon or poor man’s
Concord, incorporated the same principles of construction found in the
finer Concords, but the joinery was done in a simpler manner and the
body was shaped with flat sides instead of the egg shape of the regular
Concords.

This mud wagon was used in Herkimer County, New York and was probably
built by Abbot and Downing, for it is identical with their style number
208.


  [Illustration]


                 HIGHLAND & ALPINE HOUSE CONCORD COACH

   _Red with gold and black trim; interior is heavy crimson mohair._

This coach, completed April 5, 1852, was used by the Highland and
Alpine hotels in the White Mountains of New Hampshire.

In blurred pencil markings on the inside door where the lining has
fallen away can still be seen the names of the men who worked on this
coach--John L. French, wheelwright; William L. Pearson, trimmer; John
Bergum, painter.

Great care was lavished on the painting of the scrolls, striping and
decorative scenes on the door panels. Customers usually had definite
ideas as to what they wanted--“ornament up rich and tasty,” “flowers
and nice landscapes on doors;” “put eagle,” “on the other door a female
figure,” “on the door Pharaoh’s horses,” “a lady on horseback;” “Queen
Victoria” (this for a stage line in Nova Scotia, Canada); “a coach
and horses painted in the road,” “horses on one door and dogs on the
other”--These specifications appear on the old order forms in the
archives of the New Hampshire Historical Society.




                            _Bibliography_


   ADAMS, WILLIAM BRIDGES, English Pleasure Carriages, London,
     England 1837

   BEAUFORT, DUKE OF, Driving, Badminton Series, London, England
     1889

   BELLOC, HILAIRE, Highway and its Vehicles, London, England 1926

   BURGESS, JAMES W., Practical Treatise on Coach Building, London,
     England 1881

   DOWNING, PAUL H., Carriage Gallery at the New York Historical
     Society, New York Historical Society Quarterly, October 1950

   EARLE, ALICE MORSE, Stage Coach and Tavern Days, New York 1900

   FELTON, WILLIAM, A Treatise on Carriages, London, England 1796

   FITZGERALD, WM. N., Carriage Trimmers’ Manual and Guide Book and
     Illustrated Technical Dictionary, New York 1881

   GARLAND, JAMES A., The Private Stable, Boston, Massachusetts 1903

   GILBEY, SIR WALTER, Modern Carriages, London, England 1905

   HOWLETT, E., Driving Lessons, New York 1894

   HUNT, ELMER MUNSON, Abbot-Downing and the Concord Coach,
     Historical New Hampshire Quarterly 1945

   KNIGHT, CAPT. C. MORLEY, Hints on Driving, London, England 1895

   LENE, La Sellerie Français et Étrangère, Paris, France 1878

   MCCAUSLAND, HUGH, The English Carriage, London, England 1948

   MITCHELL, EDWIN VALENTINE, Horse and Buggy Age in New England,
     New York 1937

   MOSEMANS’, Illustrated Guide for Purchasers of Horse Furnishing
     Goods, etc. New York, no date--about 1890

   RITTENHOUSE, JACK D., American Horse-drawn Vehicles, Los
     Angeles, Calif. 1948

   ROGERS, FAIRMAN, A Manual of Coaching, Philadelphia, Pa. 1900

   THROM, EDWARD L., Popular Mechanics Picture History of American
     Transportation, New York 1952

   UNDERHILL, FRANCIS T., Driving for Pleasure, New York 1896

   WALL, MARGARET V., Carriage House of the Suffolk Museum at Stony
     Brook, Long Island, New York 1954

   WARE, FRANCIS M., Driving, New York 1903

   WARE, I. D., Coach-makers’ Illustrated Handbook, Philadelphia,
     Pa. 1875

          *       *       *       *       *

   Secondary sources--pamphlets, newspaper clippings,
     correspondence, and carriage maker’s catalogs.


  [Illustration]




               _Catalog of Vehicles at Shelburne Museum_

_Note_--Sleighs, commercial and farm wagons, miniatures, and fire
equipment will be included in subsequent publications.


    CATALOG                                                 ILLUSTRATED
    NUMBER                                                    ON PAGE

    V-1    ROAD CART (about 1870)
           Museum collection

    V-2    ONE-HORSE CHAISE (about 1830)
           Built by Coach and Chaise Manufacturer, Charlestown,
           Massachusetts.
           On loan, Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont

    V-3    CHAISE (late 18th century)                                9
           Museum collection

    V-4    DOCTOR’S GIG (about 1800)                                10
           On loan, Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont

    V-5    CANADIAN CALÈCHE (about 1885)                            57
           Museum collection

    V-6    DOCTOR’S GIG (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-7    CURTAIN ROCKAWAY (early 19th century)
           On loan, Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont; gift to
             them by C. Bullard of New Haven, Vermont

    V-8    PLEASURE WAGON “President’s Carriage” (early 19th
             century)                                               56
           On loan, Sheldon Museum, Middlebury, Vermont

    V-9    IRISH JAUNTING CAR (about 1900)
           Gift of Mr. Cleveland Dodge, New York, New York

    V-10   PANEL-BOOT VICTORIA (about 1895)                         19
           Built by Henry Hooker & Company, New Haven, Connecticut
             (#1400).
           Gift of Mrs. Charles E. Tilton, Tilton, New Hampshire

    V-11   OCTAGON FRONT ROCKAWAY (about 1890)
           Museum collection

    V-12   “WICKER-SEAT” CABRIOLET (about 1865)
           Museum collection

    V-13   LADIES’ DRIVING PHAETON--parasol top (about 1890)
           Museum collection

    V-14   CUT-UNDER PHAETON (about 1890)                            3
           Museum collection

    V-15   CURRICLE (about 1900)                                     8
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York. Museum collection

    V-16   MEADOWBROOK CART (about 1900)
           Museum collection

    V-17   THREE-SEAT SURREY (about 1900)                           40
           Museum collection

    V-18   DOG CART (about 1890)                                    11
           Built by Fred F. French and Company, Sudbury Street,
             Boston, Mass.
           Gift of Mr. Arthur Brown, Tilton, New Hampshire

    V-19   CUT-UNDER BASKET PHAETON (about 1900)                     6
           Gift of Mr. Arthur Brown, Tilton, New Hampshire

    V-20   PONY BUCKBOARD (about 1895)
           Built by Joubert & White, Glens Falls, New York.
           Gift of Mr. J. Watson Webb, Shelburne, Vt.

    V-21   EXTENSION-TOP SURREY (about 1900)                        41
           Built by J. R. and J. H. Lockwood, Burlington, Vt.
           Museum collection

    V-22   COUPÉ ROCKAWAY (about 1900)                              43
           Built by Z. Thompson & Bros., Portland, Maine and
             Kimball Brothers Company, Boston, Mass.
           Museum collection

    V-23   STICK-SEAT SURREY (about 1900)
           Sold by Walter B. Johnson, Essex Junction, Vermont;
             built by Cortland Cart and Carriage Company, Sidney,
             New York.
           Gift of Mrs. Edward H. Loomis, Addison, Vermont.

    V-24   LEATHER TOP SURREY (about 1900)
           Museum collection

    V-25   ROCKAWAY (about 1885)
           Built by Sargent and Company, Boston, Mass.
           Gift of Fanny Allen Hospital, Burlington, Vermont

    V-26   MINIATURE BROUGHAM (about 1885)
           Gift of Fanny Allen Hospital, Burlington, Vt.

    V-27   STICK-SEAT BUCKBOARD, “Liar’s Wagon” (about 1885)
           Museum collection

    V-28   GOVERNESS CART (about 1900)
           Gift of Mrs. Wilfred Rhodes, St. Thomas, Jamaica

    V-29   CONCORD WAGON (about 1840)                               55
           Built by Downing & Abbot., Concord, New Hampshire.
           Gift of Mr. W. B. Hill, Tilton, New Hampshire

    V-30   SKELETON WAGON (about 1870)                              51
           Museum collection

    V-31   HANSOM CAB (about 1895)                                  31
           Built by Hincks & Johnson, Bridgeport, Conn.
           Museum collection

    V-32   KENTUCKY BREAKING CART (about 1895)                      54
           Built by H. H. Babcock Company, Watertown, N. Y.
           Gift of Dr. Stuart Orton, Rahway, New Jersey

    V-33   DEPOT WAGON (about 1890)                                 42
           Built by Horace Ervien, Ogontz, Pennsylvania.
           Gift of Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Lippincott, Jenkintown, Pa.

    V-34   SICILIAN DONKEY CART (about 1932)
           Built Fabrica Carri, Montoleone, Palermo, Sicily.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-35   PONY BREAK (about 1938)
           Built by Dennis Brothers, London, England.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-36   PONY DOG CART “Going-to-Cover Cart” (about 1890)         14
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-37   SPIDER PHAETON (about 1890)                               2
           Built by Muhlbacher, Paris, France.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-38   RUNABOUT (about 1900)
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-39   BUCKBOARD BUGGY (about 1900)
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    V-40   BUCKBOARD (about 1885).
           Gift of Mr. Scott Lord Smith, Poughkeepsie, N. Y.

    V-41   TUB CART (about 1883)                                    52
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-42   PONY BUCKBOARD (about 1890)                              46
           Built by J. B. Dubuc, Shelburne, Vermont.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-43   PONY BUCKBOARD (about 1900)
           Built by Joubert & White (#1202) Glens Falls, N. Y.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-44   BUCKBOARD PHAETON (about 1895)                           45
           Built by Joubert & White, Glens Falls, N. Y.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-45   BUCKBOARD WITH RUMBLE SEAT (about 1900)
           Built by Joubert & White, Glens Falls, N. Y.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-46   MAIL PHAETON (about 1882)                                 1
           Built by F. S. Brown & Company, New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-47   SKELETON-BOOT VICTORIA (about 1904)                      20
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-48   BERLIN (about 1890)                                      26
           Built by Million et Guiet, Paris, France.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-49   TANDEM CART (about 1890)                                 12
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-50   BREAK WITH PERCH--Wagonette Break (about 1895)           38
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-51   CALÈCHE (about 1890)                                     24
           Built by Million et Guiet, Paris, France.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-52   PRIVATE OMNIBUS (about 1890)                             23
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-53   BROUGHAM (about 1890)                                    16
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-54   6-PASSENGER ROCKAWAY (about 1850)                        44
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-55   VIS-À-VIS (about 1890)                                   22
           Built by Brewster & Co. New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-56   GEORGE IV PHAETON (about 1882)                            4
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-57   BUCKBOARD SURREY (about 1900)
           Built by Joubert & White, Glens Falls, N. Y.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-58   NORFOLK SHOOTING CART (about 1885)
           Built by Thorn Patent Norfolk Carriage Works, Norwich,
             England.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-59   SLAT-SIDE SHOOTING CART (about 1895)                     15
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    V-60   FORMAL COACH (about 1890)                                29
           Gift of Henry M. Tuttle Company, Bennington, Vermont,
             in memory of Mr. Fred Stickles, for many years
             president of that company

    V-61   TRIPLE BUCKBOARD (about 1885)                            49
           Built in Glens Falls New York for Dr. E. D. Ferguson
             of Troy, New York.
           Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Charles E. Childs, Manchester,
             Vermont

    V-62   DOUBLE BUCKBOARD (about 1885)                            48
             Gift of Mr. J. Watson Webb, Shelburne, Vt.

    V-63   ROYAL SPIDER (about 1900)
           Built by Flandrau & Company, New York.
           Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Brewer, Burlington, Vt.

    V-64   LADIES’ PHAETON (about 1900)
           Gift of Mrs. Katherine Thayer Hobson, New York

    V-65   CALÈCHE D’ENFANT (about 1825)
           Built in France. Museum collection.

    V-66   LANDAU (about 1885)                                      18
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of Mr. Henry O. Havemeyer, Mahwah, New Jersey

    V-67   MOUNTAIN WAGON (about 1890)                              58
           Built by Abbot-Downing Co., Concord, New Hampshire.
           Museum collection

    V-68   BARGE (about 1890)                                       59
           Built by Abbot-Downing Co., Concord, New Hampshire.
           Museum collection

    V-69   BOTTUM BOAT WAGON (early 19th century)
           Gift of Mrs. Carroll Landon, New Haven, Vermont

    V-70   TUNBRIDGE PLEASURE WAGON (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-71   ABBOTT PLEASURE WAGON (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-72   TOP BUGGY (about 1885)
           Museum collection

    V-73   DICKERMAN FAMILY WAGON (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-74   PLEASURE WAGON (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-75   CONVERTIBLE CARRIAGE/WAGON (about 1910)
           Patented “High Point Wagon” built by Briggs Carriages,
             Amesbury, Massachusetts.
           Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Gilbert Brewer, Burlington,
             Vermont

    V-76   COACH (about 1850)                                       28
           Museum collection

    V-77   ROOF-SEAT BREAK (about 1900)
           Built by Barker & Company, London, England.
           Museum collection

    V-78   MINIATURE PHAETON (about 1875)                            7
           Museum collection

    V-79   CANADIAN PLEASURE CART (early 19th century)
           Museum collection

    V-80   EMPIRE CALÈCHE D’ENFANT (about 1810)
           Built in Paris, France. Museum collection

    V-81   RACING SULKY (about 1870)                                50
           Museum collection

    V-82   SKELETON BREAK (about 1910)                              37
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of Mr. F. Ambrose Clark, Cooperstown, New York

    V-83   IRISH JAUNTING CAR (about 1900)                          30
           Built In Dublin, Ireland.
           Gift of Mr. Charles Sumner Bird, East Walpole,
             Massachusetts

    V-84   VIENNESE WAGON (about 1898)
           Built in Vienna, Austria.
           Gift of Mr. Charles Sumner Bird, East Walpole,
             Massachusetts

    V-85   BREAKING CART (about 1900)
           Gift of Mr. Charles Sumner Bird, East Walpole, Mass.

    V-86   RACING SULKY (about 1870)
           Museum collection

    V-87   DOCTOR’S BUGGY (about 1900)
           Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Charles Cross, Burlington, Vt.

    V-88   TOP BUGGY (about 1900)
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of Mr. Arthur S. Lawrence, Locust Valley, New York

    V-89   BUGGY (about 1870)
           Gift of Mrs. Robert H. Young, S. Starksboro, Vermont

    C-1    “LIBERTY” ROAD COACH (about 1900)                        32
           Built by Million et Guiet, Paris, France.
           Gift of Mr. J. Ford Johnson, New York, N. Y.

    C-2    HIGHLAND & ALPINE HOUSE CONCORD COACH (about 1852)       63
           Built by Abbot-Downing Co., Concord, New Hampshire.
           Museum collection

    C-3    MUD WAGON (about 1875)                                   62
           Museum collection

    C-4    PARK DRAG (about 1890)                                   34
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of the Webb family in memory of Dr. and Mrs. W.
             Seward Webb

    C-5    SCHROON LAKE CONCORD COACH (about 1875)                  60
           Museum collection

    C-6    “DEFIANCE” ROAD COACH (about 1900)                       36
           Built by Brewster & Co., New York.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, New Jersey

    C-7    PONY ROAD COACH (about 1900)
           Built by Guiet of Paris, France.
           Gift of Mrs. Gambrill in memory of her husband, Mr.
             Richard V. N. Gambrill, Peapack, N. J.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CARRIAGES AT SHELBURNE MUSEUM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


